<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformation Study Bible</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
    <link href="../styles/bookstyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page826" title="826" />
      <h1>The Book of the Psalms</h1>
      <h2>Title</h2>
      <p class="noind">The title “Psalms” comes from the Greek and Latin tradition. The Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Old Testament) uses the word <span class="italic">Psalmos,</span> and the Latin Vulgate translation, which was the Bible the church used during the Middle Ages, uses the word <span class="italic">Psalmus</span>. Both of these terms mean “a song sung to the accompaniment of stringed instruments.” The New Testament uses <span class="italic">psalmos</span> as well (Luke 20:42; 24:44; Acts 1:20). The corresponding Hb. word <span class="italic">mizmor</span> occurs frequently in the title of various psalms (e.g., Ps. 3). The Hebrew title, however, is “Praises,” a translation of the Hb. word <span class="italic">tehillah</span> (“praise”), and this title captures the overarching movement in the book from lamentation and suffering at the beginning to praise and glory at the end.</p>

      <h2>Author</h2>
      <p class="noind">Many of the psalms begin with a title linking the psalm with a particular individual or group, using a Hb. preposition that could possibly indicate dedication (“to David”), subject matter (“about David”), or authorship (“by David”). However, one of the few psalm titles with expanded content (Ps. 18) leaves little doubt that the title intends to identify the composer of the psalm. David is by far the most frequently cited author, most of his psalms being in the first two books (see Structure), though there is a small collection of psalms by him at the very end (Pss. 138–145). The tradition that associates David with singing and psalm composition is so strong (1 Sam. 16:14–23; 2 Sam. 1:17–27; 2 Sam. 22; 2 Sam. 23:1; 1 Chr. 6:31; 15:16; 16:7; Ps. 18; Amos 6:5; Matt. 22:43; Acts 1:16) that there is little doubt that David wrote many or all of the psalms that bear his name.</p>
      <p>Other authors appear in psalm titles: Moses (Ps. 90), Solomon (Pss. 72; 127), the sons of Korah (Pss. 42–49; 84; 85; 87; 88), Asaph (Pss. 50; 73–83), and Ethan the Ezrahite (Ps. 89). A number of psalms have no designated author (e.g., Pss. 1; 71).</p>

      <h2>Date and Occasion</h2>
      <p class="noind">The titles of the psalms show that they were composed by individuals in response to particular corporate or individual experiences. The dates and occasions of the psalms (see the introductory paragraphs to the psalms in the notes) range from the time of Moses (Ps. 90), to the experiences of David (Ps. 51), to the time after the Babylonian exile (Ps. 126), a span of approximately one thousand <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page827" title="827" />years. Still, the psalms that originated in specific situations and were collected for use in private devotion or public worship were never so time-bound that they could not be used in a variety of new situations. Forming the collection as a whole took several centuries, and was not completed until sometime after the exile in Babylon. The entire collection is also known as the Psalter.</p>

      <h2>Genre</h2>
      <p class="noind">The broadest genre consideration is that the book of Psalms is poetry, not prose. For additional discussion of the poetic character of Psalms, see the Introduction to Hebrew Poetry.</p>
      <p>Distinguishing characteristics allow the individual psalms to be assigned to literary categories for the purpose of study. These categories are not to be seen as mutually exclusive but as perspectives from which to gain insight into the various psalms. The following are the literary categories commonly used in the book of Psalms.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">1. Hymns.</span> Hymns were composed for times when all is well. Hymns are easily recognized by their exuberant praise of the Lord, and they typically praise the Lord for who He is as the Creator (e.g., Ps. 104) and Redeemer (e.g., Ps. 105). Hymns usually have three sections: a call to praise God, the praise proper, and a concluding affirmation of faith or renewed call to praise. Psalm 103 is a good example of this structure: Call to Praise (vv. 1, 2), Praise (vv. 3–19), and Call to Praise (vv. 20–22). For other examples of hymns, see Pss. 8; 19; 29; 33; 65; 67; 68; 93; 96; 98; 100; 111; 113; 114; 117; 135; 145; 146; 147; 148; 149; 150.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">2. Laments.</span> Laments were composed for when all is not well, and thus express emotions experienced in times of great sorrow or loss. In a lament, the psalmist opens his heart honestly to God, a heart filled with sadness, loneliness, perplexity, grief, abandonment, fear, or anger. With few exceptions (Pss. 44; 88) the laments turn to the Lord with confidence at the end. Laments usually have two sections: the plea for help followed by confidence or praise. Psalm 6 is a fine example: Plea for Help (vv. 1–7) and Confidence in Being Delivered (vv. 8, 9). For other examples, see Pss. 3; 5; 7; 13; 17; 22; 25; 26; 27; 28; 38; 39; 42; 43; 51; 54; 55; 56; 57; 59; 61; 63; 64; 69; 70; 71; 74; 79; 80; 83; 86; 89; 102; 109; 120; 130; 140; 141; 142; 143.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">3. Thanksgiving Psalms.</span> Psalms of thanksgiving are like hymns in that they focus on the praise of God. The difference is that the hymns focus on what God has done in the distant past, in creation or in redemptive history, while the psalms of thanksgiving focus on what God has done in the recent, personal history of the psalmist. In particular, psalms of thanksgiving were written to celebrate those times when the Lord answered a prayer of lament. Like the hymns, the thanksgiving psalms usually have three sections: an opening intention to give thanks, a recollection of trouble (often mirroring the structure and language of the lament), and a concluding renewal of thanksgiving. Psalm 116 is probably the most personal example: Thanksgiving and Love (vv. 1–3), Recollection of Trouble (vv. 3–11), and Thanksgiving and Praise (vv. 12–19). For other examples, see Pss. 18; 30; 34; 40; 41; 66; 92; 118; 124; 138.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">4. Psalms of Confidence (or Trust).</span> In between the laments and the psalms of thanksgiving are the psalms of confidence. There is typically some sort of trouble in view in these psalms, but the anguish is not as intense as in the laments, and the psalmist is not yet completely out of trouble. The dominant mood of these psalms is confidence that the Lord will deliver the psalmist. Unlike the first three genres, the psalms of confidence apparently have no common structure. For examples, see Pss. 16; 23; 27; 62; 73; 91; 115; 121; 125; 131.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">5. Kingship Psalms.</span> Since God, the King of the universe, is the subject of many psalms and since David, the human king, is the subject of many other psalms, kingship is an important concept in the Psalter (see Characteristics and Primary Themes). A few psalms, however, focus so intensely on divine kingship (Ps. 47) or on human kingship (Ps. 45) that they stand out as a separate genre. Lacking any formal structure, the kingship psalms are held together by themes such as creation, redemption, judgment, supremacy over idols, and universal care. For examples of divine kingship psalms, see Pss. 24; 29; 47; 48; 93; 95; 96; 97; 98; 99; 145; and for examples of human kingship psalms, see Pss. 2; 20; 21; 45; 61; 63; 72.</p>
      <p><span class="italic">6. Wisdom Psalms.</span> Some psalms are at home in the world of Proverbs, Job, and Ecclesiastes. There is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page828" title="828" />a certain diction that these psalms share with the other wisdom books: pronouncements of blessing, numerical sayings, “better than” sayings, alphabetic structuring, and admonitions. The wisdom psalms also make use of themes found in the Wisdom Literature: the way of the righteous and the way of the wicked, the contrast between the wise and the foolish, practical advice, retribution, and the fear of the Lord. The convergence of wisdom’s diction and wisdom’s themes suffices to place certain psalms in this category. For examples, see Pss. 1; 19; 32; 34; 37; 49; 73; 112; 119; 128.</p>

      <h2>Literary Features</h2>
      <p class="noind">The psalms are arranged in five books. The end of each book is marked by doxology (Pss. 1–41; 42–72; 73–89; 90–106; 107–150). Jewish tradition holds that the number five was chosen to match the five books of Moses, and this is certainly the case. Both the five books of Moses and the five books of the Psalms are <span class="italic">torah</span> (instruction) from the Lord (Ps. 1:2).</p>
      <p>Book 1 begins with the inauguration of the Davidic covenant (Ps. 2) and ends with the promises of Ps. 2 coming to realization (Ps. 41). Book 2 ends with the covenant of kingship being transferred to Solomon (Ps. 72), who is a type of the blessed man of Ps. 1 (see the imagery in Ps. 72:5–7) and a type of the Messianic King of Ps. 2 (see the language in Ps. 72:8–11). Book 3 then ends on an ominous note. The first psalm of the section complains that the righteous suffer. The last psalm of the section laments that the Davidic covenant seems to have failed, with the king’s crown rolling in the dust (Ps. 89). Ps. 88 is the only psalm without praise. The remaining books answer the question burning in the hearts and minds of the postexilic community: “How do we live in the absence of the Davidic king?” Book 4 replies that we live by faith that the Lord is still King in spite of evidence to the contrary. Within this book, Pss. 93–99, called “enthronement psalms,” look to God’s reign on earth. Book 5 replies that we live with an obedience (Ps. 119) that focuses on the true worship of God (Ps. 145–150). It begins by thanking God for bringing Israel back from the exile, and includes psalms holding up David as a model for piety (138–145), as well as psalms predicting the reign of the Messiah (110).</p>

      <h2>Characteristics and Primary Themes</h2>
      <p class="noind">Psalms 1 and 2 introduce us to the main themes of the book of Psalms: the life of holiness and happiness (Ps. 1) under the reign of the divine King and His Messiah (Ps. 2).</p>
      <p>Psalm 1 gives us the purpose of the book of Psalms: to provide a manual for meditating on the instruction of the Lord, so that we can experience the “blessed” life, a life of abundant holiness and happiness. Psalm 2 gives us the overarching message of the book of Psalms: the Divine King reigns through His Messiah, who comes from the line of David. In fact, concerns related to the Davidic king are so prevalent in the Psalter that the book of Psalms in many ways functions as the hymnbook of the king. In the ancient Near East, the king was a key figure in worship, leading the people in the praise and worship of their deities. The king of Israel, of course, stands out among the other kings in the region as a worshiper of the only true God, the representative of God’s people before the divine throne. Thus, the book of Psalms has special importance for the sons of David and, preeminently, David’s greatest son—the Messiah. It is no accident, therefore, that the New Testament authors extensively quote from the book of Psalms, even indicating that they belong on the lips of Jesus in a special way (e.g., Heb. 2:10–13; 10:5–7).</p>
      <p>Since the Davidic king had a key role in worship, we also see that the book of Psalms is designed specifically for liturgical use. Many of them, in fact, call on the people of God to worship the Lord (e.g., Pss. 95:6; 132:7). Consequently, the psalms have been treasured by God’s people for use in His worship down through the centuries.</p>

      <h2>Theology of the Psalms</h2>
      <p class="noind">Just as the Psalter was formed during the entire period of the Old Testament, so the theology of the psalms is as large as the Old Testament. Martin Luther called the Psalms “a little Bible, and the summary of the Old Testament.” The overarching presentation of God in the book of Psalms is God as King. Two corollaries to God as King in the Psalms are God as Creator and God as Redeemer. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page829" title="829" />God’s transcendence and his immanence, along with virtually all of his other attributes, run like golden threads through the entire Psalter.</p>
      <p>Therefore, the book of Psalms gives us one of the most complete and comprehensive revelations of the character of God in the entire Bible. If we want to know who God is, what He has done, and how we should respond to Him, the book of Psalms is one of the best places to start.</p>

      <h2>Psalms in the Larger Story of the Bible</h2>
      <p class="noind">The book of Psalms was in all likelihood completed during the postexilic era and was compiled among other reasons to answer the question: “How do we live in the absence of the Davidic King?” (see Literary Features). As such, the book of Psalms served to give hope to God’s people that the Messiah would one day come, a hope that is realized finally in Christ and the consummation of His reign, as revealed in the New Testament. As we await the return of Christ, believers today are somewhat like believers who are seeking to understand how we are to live in the physical absence of the Davidic king, though we know that even now, Christ rules as the King of kings by His Spirit in the church and over all creation as the Creator and Lord of all. Like the Jews before the incarnation, we await the coming of the Messiah, only this time we are looking for His second coming, and the book of Psalms still serves to encourage that hope.</p>

      <h2>Christ in the Psalms</h2>
      <p class="noind">Christian readers of the Psalms appreciate the relationship these ancient songs have to Jesus Christ. Jesus told His disciples after the resurrection that “everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled” (Luke 24:44). The Old Testament, including the Psalms, looked forward to Christ’s coming, His suffering, and His glorification. Jesus and the New Testament writers use the Psalms to express His suffering (Matt. 27:46) and His glorification (Matt. 22:41–46), in keeping with the overarching movement of the Psalter (see Title). Often, individual psalms begin with the reflection of David on his life or on events in his life and them move to David’s greatest son, the Messiah to come, such as Pss. 2 and 110. Psalm 23 points the reader directly to Christ, the Good Shepherd who gave His life for His sheep (cf. John 10:11–18).</p>
      <p>In addition, since Jesus is Lord of the covenant, the Psalms are sung to Him, and since Jesus is Servant of the covenant, the psalms are sung by Him. Jesus is therefore above us as the One to whom we sing, and Jesus is beside us as the One who sings with us in all of life’s experiences (Heb. 2:12).</p>

      <h2>History of Interpretation</h2>
      <p class="noind">Traditionally, a psalm was interpreted in its presumed historical context from the books of Samuel and Kings. One problem with this approach is that only fourteen psalms contain historical information in the title. A second problem is that some of the historical information in the titles is problematic (see Special Issues). So this approach is only partially helpful. At the end of the nineteenth century, there was a move to study a given psalm in the context of other psalms from the same genre. This approach remains an integral part of interpreting the book of Psalms to this day. In the mid-1980s, the book of Psalms began to be studied not as a random collection of poems but as a purposely arranged collection. This means that a given psalm is to be interpreted in the context of the surrounding psalms as well as in the context of its genre.</p>

      <h2>Special Issues</h2>
      <p class="noind"><span class="italic">The Curses of the Psalms.</span> Some psalms, called imprecatory psalms, cry out not only for the righteous to be vindicated, but also for God to punish the wicked (e.g., Ps. 69:22–28). Such prayers reflect the calling of Israel to holy war as God’s instruments of judgment. With the coming of Christ to bear God’s judgment, the warfare of God’s people continues, now primarily directed against “spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places” (Eph. 6:12). In their warfare, Christians are commanded to bless their personal enemies, overcoming evil with good (Rom. 12:17–21). Theologians are divided over whether there might be circumstances <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page830" title="830" />under which Christians may pray the imprecatory psalms against the church’s enemies in the new covenant era. If there is a place for such prayers, two things must be kept in mind: First, as under the old covenant, the imprecatory psalms are not for use against just any enemy who causes problems for God’s people; rather, they are for enemies who are flagrantly and impenitently evil in their actions against Christ’s church. Second, in praying imprecatory psalms, space must always be allowed for the Lord to answer them by redeeming our enemies through judgment, just as He has done for us. Christ bore the imprecations that were rightly directed at us as the enemies of God, and so we passed through judgment in Him unto eternal life. God may do the same for our enemies, uniting them to Christ so that He bears the imprecations in their place, granting them the gift of eternal life (cf. Gal. 3:10–14).</p>
      <p><span class="italic">Titles.</span> Scholars have long debated whether the titles of the various psalms were written by the authors of the psalms themselves or if they are later additions. The titles are either an original part of the psalms or they come from early tradition, and were added before the final canonical form of the book was completed before the Septuagint translation of 200 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> Although the debate continues, evidence such as the appearance of the same information in the title to Psalm 18 and in 2 Samuel 22:1 means that the titles should be taken as original to the psalms and thus contain critical information about their original setting. In other words, the life settings described in the psalm titles are accurate and reflect the historical circumstances under which they were written. The titles contain five types of information:</p>
      <p>1. Authorship. See the discussion at Author above.</p>
      <p>2. Historical Background. Fourteen psalms have historical information in the title (Pss. 3; 7; 18; 30; 34; 51; 52; 54; 56; 57; 59; 60; 63; 142). There are a some places where it is either hard to match the content of the title with the content of the psalm (e.g., Ps. 30) or to match the content of the title and the psalm with the historical narrative (e.g., Ps. 3 and 2 Sam. 18:5). While the historical titles may give us an indication of the origin of a psalm, they are of limited help in interpretation; see History of Interpretation above.</p>
      <p>3. Genre. A number of the terms in the titles classify the psalms into ancient genres. Some are frequent, e.g, <span class="italic">mizmor</span> (“psalm”) and <span class="italic">shir</span> (“song”), while others are rare. It is difficult, however, to know the precise meaning of the terms used, and some psalms are both a <span class="italic">mizmor</span> and a <span class="italic">shir</span> (Pss. 30; 66; 67; 68; 75; 83; 87; 88). In contemporary discussions, genre is discerned from the structure and content of the psalms and not from the titles.</p>
      <p>4. Musical Direction. Some musical notes refer to instruments, e.g., “flutes” (Ps. 5) and “stringed instruments” (Ps. 6). The meaning of other musical notes is obscure, which is why translators transcribe the Hebrew terms, e.g., “Sheminith” (Ps. 6) and “Shiggaion” (Ps. 7); the same holds true for the ubiquitous “<span class="italic">selah</span>” (Ps. 3:2).</p>
      <p>5. Instructions. Occasionally, the titles indicate how the psalms were used in formal worship. Of these, the best known are the “Songs of Ascents.”</p>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page831" title="831" />
      <h2>Outline of the Psalms</h2>
      <ol class="none">
        <li><span class="bold">I. BOOK I, Psalms 1–41</span></li>
        <li><span class="bold">II. BOOK II, Psalms 42–72</span></li>
        <li><span class="bold">III. BOOK III, Psalms 73–89</span></li>
        <li><span class="bold">IV. BOOK IV, Psalms 90–106</span></li>
        <li><span class="bold">V. BOOK V, Psalms 107–150</span></li>
      </ol>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page832" title="832" />
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Pss. 1; 2</span> Ps. 1 provides the purpose of the book of Psalms as a manual for living the blessed life, while Ps. 2 provides the overall message of the book in terms of God’s reign through His messianic king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 1</span> Like the gateway to a sanctuary, one of the relatively few wisdom psalms introduces the whole collection. Before having close conversation with God, the reader’s attitude toward the law of God has to be considered. The righteous person loves and studies it; the wicked person hates it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 1:1 Blessed.</span> A stronger word than “happy” (see Deut. 33:29; 1 Kin. 10:8; 2 Chr. 9:7; Eccl. 10:17; Is. 32:20). To be “blessed” is to enjoy well-being in every area of life.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">walks not . . . nor stands . . . nor sits.</span> The righteous person is described by what he avoids. There is a downward progression in the verbs “walks,” “stands,” and “sits.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">way.</span> A common metaphor in the Wisdom Literature for lifestyle (Prov. 1:15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 1:2 his delight.</span> The righteous person is described as someone who loves the law of God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">law of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Heb. <span class="italic">torah</span> can refer to a specific command but here means “instruction” more broadly. “The instruction of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” refers to the five books of Moses (2 Chr. 34:14) and then to the five books of the Psalter (see Introduction: Literary Features). Like the five books of Moses, the five books of the Psalter are instruction in general and for experiencing blessedness and prosperity in particular. They also have the important function of teaching how to praise in the midst of adversity.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">meditates.</span> Hebrew meditation was not a silent activity but a low intonation of the Scriptures; hence the association of meditation with the mouth (19:14; Josh. 1:8). Hebrew meditation also was not a disengaging of mental activity but involved intellectual engagement with the text of Scripture; hence the association of meditation with the heart/mind (19:14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 1:3 like a tree.</span> “Tree” is a symbol of the blessed life (Prov. 3:18).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">planted.</span> An image of endurance; the tree will not be blown away like chaff.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">streams.</span> An image pointing to resources. As the tree drinks from the stream, the righteous drink from “the instruction of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">fruit.</span> Unlike the chaff, which is good for nothing, the righteous live lives of purposeful productivity.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">prospers.</span> The Hebrew word is broader in scope than English “prospers,” which tends to be restricted to finances. The Hebrew word means “succeeds” (Is. 55:11), which fits well with “in all that he does.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 1:4 The wicked are not so.</span> The contrast is strong. The wicked are compared to dead and rootless plants. A puff of wind carries them away.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.1.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 1:6 the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">knows the way.</span> The two ways of life are determined by one’s relation to the Lord. Jesus has fulfilled the role that we could never fulfill, and He is also the model to imitate. Ps. 1 shows us a picture of Christ, the perfect blessed man, and it calls us to be increasingly like Christ.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">perish.</span> The sense is “comes to nothing.” As chaff is good for nothing, the wicked way of life comes to nothing (see 112:10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 2</span> The theme of kingship pervades this psalm, which gives the overall message of the book: the Lord reigns. While most of the kingship psalms focus on either divine or human kingship, Ps. 2 masterfully integrates both, contrasting the divine King and His human counterpart with the hostile “kings of the earth.” The psalm has no title, but the NT ascribes it to David (Acts 4:25). The NT frequently quotes and alludes to this psalm (Matt. 3:17; 17:5; Acts 4:25–27; 13:33; Rom. 1:4; Heb. 1:5; 5:5). Jesus Christ is the Son of David and the Son of God; the promises given to David come to fulfillment in Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:1–3</span> In these verses the wicked plot against the Lord and His anointed king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:1 plot.</span> The underlying Hebrew word was used in 1:2, where the righteous “meditate” on the Lord’s instruction so as to obey it. In contrast the wicked “plot” to rebel against it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:2 kings.</span> The nations are being organized by their political leaders.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his Anointed.</span> Heb. <span class="italic">mashiach</span> (“anointed”) is the origin of Eng. <span class="italic">messiah</span>. The Davidic king was anointed with oil as a symbol of the Holy Spirit’s descent to empower the king for office. While the contemporary Davidic king is undoubtedly in view for the psalmist, the ultimate reference of the song is to Christ, the King of kings.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page833" title="833" />burst their bonds.</span> A metaphor for rebellion.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:4–9</span> The Lord answers His enemies with the installation of the King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:4 sits.</span> That is, sits enthroned as king (29:10).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">laughs.</span> The kings of the earth are no match for the King of heaven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:6 my King.</span> The Lord counters the plotting of the kings by pointing to the establishment of His messianic king, prefigured by the previous kings in the line of David.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zion, my holy hill.</span> Zion is a hill north of the Davidic city of Jerusalem. It is important not because of its size but because it is the location of the temple, the place of God’s special covenant presence; hence “my holy hill.” Jerusalem as a whole is sometimes called “Zion.” Earthly Zion was a token of the heavenly Zion. Much of the symbolism of the temple pointed to heavenly realities.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:7 You are my Son.</span> The divine speech addressed to the divine Son (cf. Heb. 1:5), with David as witness, reflects the promise of 2 Sam. 7:14—the Davidic covenant, which had in view not merely David’s earthly descendants but also the divine Son of whom David was also an ancestor.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:10–12</span> The poet sets the alternatives before everyone.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:10 be wise . . . be warned.</span> Like the call to wisdom issued throughout the book of Proverbs, the call here is to embrace the wise path that leads to life and to avoid the foolish path that leads to death.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.2.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 2:12 Kiss the Son.</span> To kiss the Son is an act of submission (cf. 1 Sam. 10:1; 1 Kin. 19:18). The word “Son” is not the usual Hebrew term but an unexpected Aramaic term.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">perish . . . Blessed.</span> The same words used in 1:6 and 1:1, respectively. All are invited to choose between the two ways, one of rebellion against the Son, which leads to death, and the way of trust, which leads to the blessed life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 3</span> Surrounded by trouble and crying out to the Lord in distress, the psalmist expresses deep trust in God. The psalm was originally composed when David fled from Absalom and battled against revolt (see 2 Sam. 15:13–37). The military terminology throughout the psalm may indicate that it continued to be used in warfare after David’s day.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:1–3</span> These verses (second-person address to the Lord) focus on the psalmist’s enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:1 Many . . . rising.</span> The number and nature of the foes betray the royal origin of the psalm. The foes of the nation are also the king’s foes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:2 salvation.</span> Here, “salvation” means deliverance in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:3 shield.</span> A common image for protection, e.g., 7:10; 18:2; 28:7.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">lifter of my head.</span> An expression of encouragement (see 110:7).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:4–6</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page834" title="834" />These verses (third-person address to the Lord) focus on the psalmist himself.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:4 holy hill.</span> That is, Zion (see 2:6 note). God designated Zion as the place where His people could approach Him through sacrifice.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:5 I lay down and slept.</span> As in Ps. 91, the psalmist is able to sleep in the war camp, though the enemy surrounds him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:7, 8</span> These verses (third-person address to the Lord) focus on the psalmist’s God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:7 Arise.</span> This expression is typical of psalms sung at the beginning of war. God fights for His people against their flesh-and-blood enemies.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you strike . . . you break.</span> In keeping with the first two imperatives, “Arise” and “Save,” these verbs are better interpreted as imperatives as well. On this cry for retributive justice, see Introduction: Special Issues.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.3.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 3:8 Salvation belongs to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See Jon. 2:9. This contrasts with the enemies’ taunts of v. 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 4</span> Like Ps. 3, this psalm was composed in distress, and the psalmist exhibits a deep confidence in God. Both psalms meditate on faith in the night (vv. 4, 8). The righteous have nothing to fear because God hears their prayers and cares for them. The righteous are not without sin but are in covenant relationship with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:1</span> This verse focuses on prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:1 Answer me . . . my righteousness.</span> The imperative verbs show the boldness of the psalmist in prayer. He can fearlessly call on God because he knows that God is his righteousness (Jer. 23:6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:2–5</span> These verses focus on exhortation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:2 my honor be turned into shame.</span> It seems that the psalmist is angry at men who turn away from God to serve the false gods of the nations.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">vain words.</span> Lit. “empty things.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">seek after lies.</span> The idols of the nations are lies because they don’t really exist. They are the figments of sinful imagination.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:3 godly.</span> Those in covenant with God, the recipients of God’s lovingkindness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:4, 5 Be angry . . . do not sin.</span> Cf. Eph. 4:26. These are the sacrifices prescribed in Lev. 1–7, offered with a righteous attitude without which all sacrifice or worship is unacceptable (Ps. 40:6–8).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:6–8</span> Focuses on prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:6 good.</span> “Good” is bounty or prosperity. The skeptics taunt that there is none. The psalmist responds to their doubts with an appeal for God to reveal Himself, which will bring the psalmist more joy than the physical blessings of grain and new wine that the skeptics are seeking.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">light of your face.</span> An image of divine favor. The phrase resembles the priestly blessing found in Num. 6:25, 26.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.4.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 4:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page835" title="835" />In peace I will . . . lie down.</span> God’s intimate presence allows the psalmist to sleep peacefully and with full confidence. His heart is filled with spiritual blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 5</span> This lament petitions the Lord in the midst of distress. However, the psalmist also expresses trust in the Lord’s protection. The psalmist’s distress is caused by the evil speech of the wicked.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:1–7</span> Prayer offered: request (vv. 1, 2a) and reason (vv. 2b–7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:1 groaning.</span> The Hebrew word implies a kind of muttering or scarcely audible speech, as would accompany reflection (1:2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:2 King.</span> David, Israel’s king, addresses God as his king. He knows that his own kingship is a reflection of God’s.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:3 morning.</span> Morning follows the night of the previous psalms (4:8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:4 not a God who delights in wickedness.</span> A poetic understatement. God hates sin (v. 5; 11:5).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">evil may not dwell.</span> God is holy, “set apart” from all evil. Sinful people may not come into His presence without a substitutionary sacrifice.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:7 abundance of your steadfast love.</span> The writer knows that he is different from the wicked only because of God’s grace. His sin would destroy him if God did not have compassion on him as he approached God’s presence. “Steadfast love” is Heb. <span class="italic">hesed</span>, God’s covenant loyalty.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">enter your house.</span> The psalmist protests his innocence by stating his desire to worship the Lord. “Your house” and “your holy temple” may refer to the site where the temple would be built or, more likely to the tabernacle of the psalmist’s own time (1 Sam. 1:9).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:18–12</span> Prayer repeated: request (v. 8) and reason (vv. 9–12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:8 your way.</span> The path of safety that God opens is also the path of obedience to His will.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:9 destruction.</span> Note how evil speech brings death.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">throat is an open grave.</span> “Throat” is a metonym for speech, and “open grave” is a metonym for stench: “their speech stinks.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:10 let them fall by their own counsels.</span> The psalmist calls upon God to punish the wicked because they are guilty. Sin often brings retributive consequences.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.5.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 5:11, 12 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page836" title="836" />refuge . . . protection . . . shield.</span> A piling up of refuge imagery.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 6</span> An individual lament. As with many laments, the psalmist expresses his trust in the Lord at the end of the psalm. The occasion of the psalm appears to be a severe illness (vv. 2, 5). This psalm is one of seven penitential psalms (along with 32; 38; 51; 102; 130; 143).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:1–4</span> A series of requests.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:1 rebuke . . . discipline.</span> The psalmist begs the Lord to refrain from verbal and physical punishment. Though God disciplines His people (Heb. 12:1–13), it is for correction and not destruction.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:2 I am languishing . . . my bones are troubled.</span> The psalmist experiences suffering, probably a serious illness. Some take the language as figurative for spiritual distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:3 how long.</span> The psalmist boldly asks how long God will permit his suffering to continue. He desperately seeks relief from the one who is able to give it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:4 Turn, O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalmist feels as if God has turned away from him.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the sake of your steadfast love.</span> The word translated “steadfast love” indicates God’s devotion in binding Himself to His people by His covenant (see 5:7).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:5–7</span> A series of reasons for the surrounding requests.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:5 no remembrance.</span> A similar statement is expressed in 30:9. The doctrine of resurrection, like the doctrine of the Trinity, is implicit in the OT but not developed fully until the NT. The living observe that the dead are silent and do not take part in worship.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Sheol.</span> This word is found most often in poetic passages that reveal the thoughts and fears of the living but are not presentations of a doctrine of resurrection or of the intermediate state. See note on Is. 14:9–11. “Sheol” is used most often in the OT simply to refer to the grave.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:8–10</span> A request coupled with confidence in the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.6.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 6:8 you workers of evil.</span> This reference, along with the reference to “foes” in the preceding verse, is abrupt. It is possible that the foes are people, like the “friends” of Job, who blamed the patient’s sickness on his sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.7.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 7</span> A lament and psalm of refuge by an innocent person beset by enemies. As one falsely accused of murder could find sanctuary in the house of God and appeal his case to God’s judgment, so the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page837" title="837" />psalmist commits his case to God. His protestations of innocence refer to specific charges and are not a claim to sinlessness. See Pss. 11; 17; 26; 27; 31; 71.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:1–9</span> A prayer for deliverance (vv. 1, 2 and vv. 6, 7) and a confession of innocence (vv. 3–5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.7.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:2 like a lion.</span> Though not found in Israel today, lions lived there in ancient times. In Scripture the lion often symbolizes power, cruelty, and ruthlessness (Is. 5:29; Nah. 2:11, 12). When used of Christ, the metaphor of the lion refers to strength, glory, and authority.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.7.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:5 let the enemy.</span> He is not afraid to invoke a curse on himself, since he knows he is innocent.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.7.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:6 Arise.</span> See note on 3:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.7.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:8 judge.</span> There is a judicial setting in this psalm of refuge. God must judge between the psalmist and his opponents.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">according to my righteousness.</span> Refers to a particular situation and not a general sinlessness.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:10–17</span> A confession of God’s justice (vv. 10–13) and the outcome of wickedness (vv. 14–16), followed by a vow of gratitude (v. 17).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 7:14–16 conceives evil . . . makes a pit . . . his own head.</span> These terms express the conviction that a sinner reaps what he sows. Sin brings retribution.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 8</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page838" title="838" />The subject of this creation hymn is the majesty of God as revealed in the created order and the majesty of humanity, God’s supreme creation. The psalm is arranged concentrically: the majesty of God’s name (v. 1a), heaven (vv. 1b–3), the central questions (v. 4), earth (vv. 5–8), and the majesty of God’s name (v. 9). This structure teaches the centrality of humanity and the ultimacy of deity. Verses 4–6 are applied to Jesus in Heb. 2:6–8. He was perfect man as well as God. Jesus is the head of redeemed humanity and is restoring human dominion over creation (Gen. 1:28). See also 1 Cor. 15:27 and Eph. 1:22.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:1</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The personal, or covenantal, name of God revealed to Moses at the burning bush (Ex. 3).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">our Lord.</span> A title that can also be translated “governor” or “master.” He is our Lord because He has established His covenant with His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">how majestic is your name.</span> The repetition of this line at the end enhances the high note of reverence that pervades the psalm. “Name” signifies the character or reputation of God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:1b–3</span> These verses focus on God’s glory in the heavens.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:2 babies . . . foes.</span> Note the contrast between the weak and the strong. However, because of God, whose praise they sing, the weak silence the powerful. See Matt. 21:16.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:3 work of your fingers.</span> The almost limitless universe is described as the work of God’s fingers, emphasizing the power of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:4 what is man.</span> See 144:3. In the vastness of the universe and against the greatness of God’s power, man seems to be little but is actually exalted in status. The Hebrew word translated “what” is translated “how” in vv. 1, 9. The answer to the question is found in the majesty of God. Humanity, created in the image of God, is majestic.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">man . . . son of man.</span> The Hebrew terms refer to humanity in general and then to individuals in particular. What is humanity as a whole, let alone mere individuals whom God has crowned with such majesty?</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:5–8</span> Focuses on humanity’s dominion on the earth. All that humanity is has been derived from the gifting of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:5 heavenly beings.</span> The Hebrew word <span class="italic">elohim</span>, here translated “heavenly beings,” usually means “God,” but it can mean “divine beings” (text note). If God were in view, one would expect, “You have made him a little lower than Yourself.” See Heb. 2:7.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">crowned.</span> A royal term. Humanity has a royal majesty.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">glory and honor.</span> Psalms regularly uses this pair, as well the pair “splendor and majesty” for royalty, both divine (24:7–10; 96:6; 104:1; 111:3; 145:4–13) and human (21:5; 45:3). God imparted a royal majesty to humanity in creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:6 dominion.</span> The “cultural mandate” of Gen. 1:28 divinely confers on humanity the royal authority and responsibility for governing earthly life.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">under his feet.</span> In the ancient world an image of dominion over and protection of that which is under the feet.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.8.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 8:9</span> This poetic line focuses on the majesty of God’s name (see v. 1a).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Pss. 9; 10</span> Originally a single psalm (note the lack of a title for Ps. 10). Together they form a single acrostic (see Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) that is concentrically arranged: a hymn of praise to the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page839" title="839" />divine King (9:1–12), a plea for the Lord to come to the aid of His people (9:13–20), a lament concerning the wicked (10:1–11), a plea for the Lord to come to the aid of His people (10:12–15), and a hymn of praise to the divine King (10:16–18).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:1–12</span> These verses are a hymn of praise to the divine King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:1 wonderful deeds.</span> The Hebrew word refers to the great acts of God, His intervention in human affairs, as at the exodus from Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:3 When my enemies turn back.</span> A statement of future hope, not past reality.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:4 giving righteous judgment.</span> The psalmist’s confidence is not in himself but in God’s character as the righteous judge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:5 blotted out their name.</span> To be remembered no more, contrasted with God’s name (v. 2), which will be praised forever.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:7 enthroned.</span> See 2:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:8 judges the world.</span> This refers to God putting everything into right order; see 96:11–13 and 98:7–9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:11 enthroned in Zion.</span> See note on 2:6. The afflicted should know that God is present with them in the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:12 avenges blood.</span> Lit. “seeks blood.” God does not let wickedness go unpunished (Gen. 9:6; Nah. 1:2–6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:13–20</span> These verses are a plea for the Lord to come to the aid of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:13 gates of death.</span> See note on Prov. 1:12. This verse is the first sign of the psalmist’s present distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:14 gates of the daughter of Zion.</span> Contrasted with “gates of death” in the previous verse. The psalmist will praise God for answered prayer in the most public places in Jerusalem, the “daughter of Zion.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:15 sunk in the pit that they made.</span> See 7:14–16. The wickedness of such enemies will come back to haunt them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:17 wicked.</span> Further defined in the second half of the verse as “all the nations that forget God.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Sheol.</span> See notes on 6:5 and Prov. 1:12.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:18 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page840" title="840" />the needy . . . the poor.</span> The phrase “the poor and needy” (35:10; 74:21; Prov. 31:9; Ezek. 18:12) is a fixed expression in the OT, and the words also appear frequently in parallel (72:12; Job 24:4; Is. 32:7; Amos 8:4). The meaning is frequently literal poverty, but the words are also used figuratively to express total dependence on God (40:17; 86:1; 109:22; also Matt. 5:3 and Luke 6:20). Poverty is not itself meritorious, but God gives special attention to the cries of the oppressed (12:5; 72:4 note). Jeremiah equates bringing “justice and righteousness” to the “poor and needy” with knowing God (Jer. 22:15, 16). This was an explicit responsibility of those in power.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.9.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 9:19 Arise.</span> See note on Ps. 3:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 10</span> See note on Ps. 9.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:1–11</span> The center of Pss. 9; 10; a lament concerning the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:1 Why . . . do you stand far away.</span> The psalmist is more troubled by the apparent absence of God than by the presence of enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:3 boasts . . . renounces.</span> The wicked person’s ethical judgments are upside down. He should bless the Lord and reject the greedy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:5 prosper at all times.</span> From the perspective of the oppressed, it appears that the oppressor has no troubles (73:12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:6 I shall not be moved.</span> This attitude of self-trust brought trouble to the psalmist himself (30:6). Confidence must be in God, not in one’s own ability.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:7 mouth . . . tongue.</span> Sins of speech are the focus of attention. Rom. 3:14 alludes to this verse.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:8 sits in ambush.</span> The metaphor of the wicked in ambush is well known from Proverbs (Prov. 1:11).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">stealthily.</span> The wicked prefer to work in darkness, not in light (John 3:19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:9 into his net.</span> The wicked is a hunter of the helpless.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:12–15</span> These verses are a plea for the Lord to come to the aid of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:12 Arise, O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See note on 3:7.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">lift up your hand.</span> The metaphor refers to God’s active intervention in behalf of the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:14 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page841" title="841" />fatherless.</span> In the ancient Near East, the fatherless and the widow were extreme examples of helplessness because they had no kinship protection.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:16–18</span> These verses are a hymn of praise to the divine King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:16 king.</span> God is covenant Lord; see Introduction: Characteristics and Themes.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">nations.</span> Those who worship other gods and persecute God’s people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.10.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 10:17, 18 justice to the fatherless.</span> The lament concludes with a strong statement of trust in God, who delivers the weak from oppression. Men terrify, but God overrules the wickedness in men.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 11</span> Another psalm of refuge that shows how to respond when the world around us is collapsing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:1 to your mountain.</span> Possibly, “from your mountain.” If it is “to your mountain,” then the advice is to flee the city for a mountain fortress. If it is “from your mountain,” then the reference is to Zion. In either case, David is being advised by others to find salvation elsewhere than in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:2 bow . . . arrow.</span> While the psalm may have had an original military setting and thus would have found appropriate use during periods of war, the image could also refer to other types of affliction.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:3 foundations.</span> That is, of the kingdom conceived as a political entity; including its economy, military, and the like.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:4–7</span> These verses focus on the Lord’s righteous rule as the object of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:4 throne.</span> As king of the universe, God is in control (9:7). Nothing escapes His notice. Not even the actions of the wicked are beyond His purview.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:6 fire and sulfur.</span> Reminiscent of the judgment on Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. 19:24). Evil will be completely burned up.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the portion of their cup.</span> There is a cup of God’s blessing (23:5) as well as a cup of His wrath. The wicked will drink wrath to its dregs (75:8). Jesus Christ took His people’s punishment upon Himself by drinking the cup of God’s judgment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.11.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 11:7 his face.</span> God will make His presence known to His people in the darkness. In the resurrection of the just this hope will be realized.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 12</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page842" title="842" />A plea for help in view of the abysmal state of the world. The psalm is concentrically arranged: the earth is in trouble (v. 1), the speech of the wicked (vv. 2–4), the Lord speaks (v. 5), the speech of the Lord (v. 6), and the earth is in trouble (vv. 7, 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:1</span> This verse focuses on the earth/world in trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:1 the godly one is gone.</span> Like Elijah in 1 Kin. 19:14, the psalmist feels alone in his devotion to the Lord.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:2–4</span> These verses focus on the speech of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:2 Everyone utters lies.</span> Lit. “they speak lies,” or “emptiness,” including outright falsehoods, but also insincere and irresponsible talk, which cheapens and corrodes all human communication.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:3 cut off.</span> “Cut off” usually means to be excluded from the community, so the sense may be more than “stop their speaking.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:4 With our tongue.</span> Speech is often used as a weapon (see 3:2; 4:2; 5:9; 10:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:5</span> This verse contains what the Lord Himself says.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:5 poor.</span> See 10:8–11.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">arise.</span> See note on 3:7. God promises to act.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:6</span> This verse focuses on the speech of the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:6 pure.</span> The promise in v. 5 can be relied upon because it is pure truth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:7, 8</span> These verses focus on the earth/world in trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.12.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 12:7 keep . . . guard.</span> In spite of the apparent chaos in the world, the believer is confident in God’s superintending care.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 13</span> A lament expressed from the perspective of an individual. The situation of distress is not clearly defined, allowing multiple applications. If “enemy” is taken literally, warfare is in view. Or the psalmist may be ill and near death (v. 3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:1, 2</span> These verses focus on the expression of dark feelings with regard to God, self, and others.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:1 How long.</span> See note on 6:3. The fourfold repetition expresses his anguish and frustration. God could resolve the issue in a moment but is letting it drag on.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">forget . . . hide your face.</span> The psalmist feels abandoned by God (see 22:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:2 take counsel in my soul.</span> The psalmist feels perplexed.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">sorrow.</span> The psalmist feels grief.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my enemy be exalted.</span> The psalmist feels frustrated in view of the promises to him in 2:8, 9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:3, 4</span> These verses focus on the psalmist’s requests regarding God, self, and others that arise from the feeling of vv. 1, 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:3 Consider . . . answer.</span> The psalmist wants God to pay attention.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">light up.</span> The psalmist wants physical sustenance rather than illumination of some sort. This same language is used of Jonathan after he ate some honey and was revived (1 Sam. 14:27, 29; see also Ps. 38:10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:4 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page843" title="843" />foes rejoice.</span> The psalmist wants to come out on top.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:5, 6</span> These verses focus on the psalmist’s faith and God’s character.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:5 But I have trusted.</span> The Hebrew emphasizes the pronoun “I” and thus the psalmist’s faith.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> Faith is founded upon God’s covenant loyalty.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shall rejoice.</span> The Hebrew grammatical form expresses the resolve of faith.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">salvation.</span> Faith is founded upon God’s saving deeds (9:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.13.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 13:6 I will sing.</span> The Hebrew grammatical form expresses the resolve of faith.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">dealt bountifully.</span> Faith is founded upon God’s generosity (116:7; 119:17; 142:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 14</span> This psalm has an attitude of quiet meditation that focuses on the fool: the fool’s character (vv. 1–4) and the fool’s fate (vv. 5–7). See Ps. 53, which is an alternate version of Ps. 14.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:1–4</span> These verses focus on the fool’s character.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:1 fool.</span> The fool may be highly intelligent by the world’s standards but is oblivious to the true nature of reality (Eccl. 2:14). To be called a fool is a moral judgment (see Prov. 1:22 note).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">There is no God.</span> The fool denies the existence of God, which is practical atheism. God is held to be unconcerned about the affairs of the world and especially the affairs of the individual.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">corrupt.</span> Note Paul’s use of this psalm in Rom. 3:10–18. Foolishness points to lack of morality, not absence of native intellect.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">none who does good.</span> Refers to doing good absolutely, with one’s motives governed fully by a desire to honor the Lord (v. 3; Eccl. 7:20; Rom. 3:12). Until our glorification, sinners cannot do good in this perfect, absolute sense. However, sinners can do good relatively. In comparison to others, some people can rightly be called “good.” (Prov. 12:2; 13:22; 14:14; Rom. 2:10; 3 John 11). Relative acts of good are insufficient to save us, for God demands absolute perfection for our justification. Only Christ can provide this perfection (Matt. 5:48; Rom. 3:21–26).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:2 seek after God.</span> Fallen man does not actively seek God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:4 no knowledge.</span> Absolute language used to communicate relative truth.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">as they eat bread.</span> The wicked exploit people frequently and without feeling guilt. It is as natural to them as eating bread.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:6 shame.</span> Those who would shame others will themselves experience shame.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his refuge.</span> God can overrule the wicked plans of evildoers for the good of the afflicted. This principle is stated by Joseph (Gen. 50:20) and is applied to the crucifixion in Acts 2:22–24.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.14.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 14:7 salvation . . . fortunes.</span> Fools will experience none of this.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">out of Zion.</span> The place where God most personally and directly revealed His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.15.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 15</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page844" title="844" />Reminiscent of Ps. 1, this psalm focuses on the requirements for approaching God’s presence at the sanctuary. It is similar to 24:3–6. The two passages (cf. also Is. 33:14–16) have been called “entrance liturgies,” since they answer the question, “Who can enter the holy place of God?”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.15.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 15:1</span> Raises the question as to the qualifications for entering God’s presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">tent.</span> Before the temple was built, the symbol of God’s dwelling with His people was a tent.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">holy hill.</span> Mount Zion, where the temple was located.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 15:2–5a</span> The qualifications for entering God’s presence. The ten requirements for entrance are ethical, not formal or liturgical.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.15.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 15:4 to his own hurt.</span> Alternatively, “and does not falter.” The point is the same: when he promises, the righteous person fulfills his word.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.15.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 15:5a not . . . at interest.</span> See Deut. 23:19, 20. A foreigner, but not a fellow Israelite, could be charged interest. Loans were intended to relieve extreme need, and interest on such loans was a form of exploitation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.15.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 15:5b shall never be moved.</span> This verse issues a promise to those who meet the qualifications for entering God’s presence. Cf. the boast of self-reliance of the wicked who say, “I shall not be moved” (10:6). Stability in life is a good thing. The question is whether God or self will be relied upon for the stability.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 16</span> This psalm expresses confidence in the Lord and presents numerous perspectives on what trust is.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:1, 2</span> Teaches that trust is reliance on the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:1 Preserve me.</span> An invocation of the Lord and a plea for help. This line indicates that the psalmist is in crisis.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:2 no good apart from you.</span> An example of hyperbole to emphasize the fact that God is the ultimate good, the source that makes all other lesser goods possible (51:4 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:3, 4</span> Teaches that trust is devotion to the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:3 saints.</span> Lit. “those who are set apart,” God’s elect people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:4 another god.</span> The danger of worshiping other gods was always present in Israel (cf. 1 Kin. 18). The psalms emphasize that the powers and epithets ascribed to the pagan gods really belong to Yahweh (Ps. 29).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">offerings of blood . . . names.</span> That is, of foreign gods. These are two examples of ways that the religious systems of the surrounding nations tried to compel their gods to help them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:5, 6</span> Teaches that trust is delight in the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:5 portion . . . cup . . . lot.</span> Three metaphors that describe life as a gift of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:6 lines.</span> Probably metaphoric for the psalmist’s quality of life. Not only is the life God has given him secure (v. 5); it is also “pleasant.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:7, 8</span> Teaches that trust is learning from the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:7 bless.</span> To bless the Lord is to praise Him in response to the blessings He has granted.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page845" title="845" />heart.</span> Lit. “kidneys” (text note). Like “heart,” it stands for the core of a person’s being.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:9–11</span> Teaches that trust is rejoicing in the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.16.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 16:10 you will not abandon my soul to Sheol.</span> The immediate application of this psalm is to David and the OT saints. It refers to deliverance from the immediate threat of death, but it points prophetically to the Son of David whom the historical David reflected and anticipated. Both Peter and Paul recognized Jesus as the ultimate fulfillment of this psalm (Acts 2:25–28; 13:35).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 17</span> A psalm of refuge titled “Prayer,” and the nature of this psalm as a “prayer” is underscored by the concentric arrangement that has prayer in the outside frame and in the center: prayer for vindication (vv. 1, 2), affirmation of the psalmist’s innocence (vv. 3–5), prayer for protection (vv. 6–8), description of the psalmist’s accusers (vv. 9–12), and prayer for deliverance and blessing (vv. 13–15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:1, 2</span> Prayer for vindication.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:1 free of deceit.</span> The psalmist is not denying that he is a sinner. He is denying specific charges made against him (see Ps. 7:8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:2 vindication.</span> Lit. “judgment.” The psalmist appeals his case to God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:3–5</span> Affirmation of the psalmist’s innocence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:3 tried my heart.</span> Here, the “heart” is the hidden center of a person’s being, but God can read the heart.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:4 word of your lips.</span> God’s will, disclosed in the law of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:5 your paths.</span> These ways, as spelled out in God’s Word, are to be contrasted with the “ways of the violent” (v. 4).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:6–8</span> Prayer for protection.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:7 steadfast love.</span> The Hebrew word denotes God’s love toward those with whom He is in covenant relationship.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Savior.</span> The psalmist could look back over the history of Israel and see how many times God had saved His people in distress. The exodus from Egypt is the prime example of God’s saving love in the OT.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:8 apple.</span> Lit. “little man,” and then pupil, since one can see a reflection of oneself, a “little person,” when one looks into the eye of another. A term of endearment well captured by the English expression “apple of the eye” (Deut. 32:10; Prov. 7:2; Zech. 2:8).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:9–12</span> Description of the psalmist’s accusers.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:10 their hearts.</span> An alternative translation is “their fat,” a caricature of their physical appearance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:11 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page846" title="846" />surrounded our steps.</span> The enemy has taken the initiative to destroy the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:12 lion.</span> When used as a negative metaphor, the reference is to ruthlessness and cruelty. Cf. 7:2; 10:9; 22:13.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:13–15</span> Prayer for deliverance and blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:13 Arise.</span> See note on 3:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:14 You fill their womb.</span> Refers to the righteous and uses the blessing of children as synecdoche for the experience of blessing in general.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">leave their abundance.</span> “A good man leaves an inheritance to his children’s children” (Prov. 13:22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.17.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 17:15 shall behold your face.</span> The psalmist will know God’s presence, hinting at his resurrection in the “likeness” of God (1 John 3:2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 18</span> This psalm thanks the Lord for a great deliverance. The strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) are arranged concentrically: opening praise of the Lord as refuge (18:1–3), what the Lord does for the king (18:4–19), central praise of the Lord as refuge (18:20–30), what the Lord does through the king (18:31–45), and concluding praise of the Lord as refuge (18:46–50). The opening and closing strophes and the central strophe show the main point of the psalm: the praise of the Lord as refuge. This same psalm appears in 2 Sam. 22 with minor differences.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:title</span> See Introduction: Author; Characteristics and Themes. The title unambiguously attributes this psalm to David.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:1–3</span> Opening praise for the Lord as refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:1 love.</span> Not the usual Hebrew word for love; it emphasizes intimacy, expressing David’s personal devotion. See 116:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:2 rock.</span> Connotes protection. When David fled from Saul, he could find refuge in the caves and cliffs of the dry streambeds.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:4–19</span> What the Lord does for the king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:4 cords of death.</span> The tentacles of death rise up from Sheol, the underworld, to drag the psalmist down.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">torrents of destruction.</span> The powers of evil and death are frequently likened to an overwhelming flood (46:2 note; 69:1, 2 notes; Is. 28:15, 17, 18; Matt. 16:18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:6 his temple.</span> The place of God’s special presence. At the dedication of the temple Solomon indicated that the proper response to trouble was to pray to God in or while facing the temple (1 Kin. 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:7 the earth . . . rocked.</span> When God reveals Himself as a warrior, nature convulses (Is. 24:4–13; Nah. 1:5).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page847" title="847" />mountains.</span> The hills symbolize all that is firm and established in the world, but they shake before the might of God (see Ex. 19:18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:8 nostrils . . . mouth.</span> The nostrils and mouth are standard figures of speech for anger (text note). Smoke and fire often accompany a theophany (a visual self-revelation of God; Gen. 15:17; Ex. 19:18; Nah. 1:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:9 darkness was under his feet.</span> God is pictured as coming with the storm clouds into battle. This portrayal is frequent in the Bible (68:4; 104:3; Nah. 1:3; Dan. 7:13). In the NT, Christ is portrayed as coming in the clouds (Mark 13:26; Rev. 1:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:10 cherub.</span> Angelic beings first mentioned in Gen. 3:24. Their role in Gen. 3 and their symbolic representation at key places in the tabernacle (Ex. 26:1, 31) indicate that they are guardians of God’s holiness (cf. Ezek. 1; 10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:13 voice.</span> Thunder; cf. 29:3–9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:14 his arrows.</span> Lightning.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:15 were seen . . . laid bare.</span> When God appears as a defender of His people, the waters representing chaos and evil shrink back. Cf. 77:16–19 (reflecting on the exodus from Egypt); Nah. 1:4; Rev. 21:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">rebuke.</span> God controls the chaotic waters of the sea (104:7; 106:9). Jesus shows Himself to be the second person of the Trinity by silencing the chaotic waters with His rebuke (Luke 8:22–25).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:16 many waters.</span> Symbolic of trouble and distress (32:6; 69:2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:19 broad place.</span> This may be an allusion to the exodus and the conquest of Canaan. God delivered Israel from many waters (Red Sea) and brought them to a broad place (the Promised Land). The broad place contrasts with a narrow one, from which it would be hard or impossible to escape from an enemy.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:20–30</span> Central praise of the Lord as refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:21 ways of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> God’s covenant law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:25 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page848" title="848" />merciful . . . show yourself merciful.</span> The term translated “merciful” has reference to God’s special lovingkindness toward those with whom He is in covenant relationship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:27 you save a humble people.</span> A constant teaching of the OT and the Psalms, most notably 113:7–9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:29 against a troop.</span> A glimpse at the original inspiration of the verse. It appears as if the psalmist is waging war.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.30"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:30 word of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> His revelation to His people. Since this is a psalm of David in a warfare setting, perhaps the reference is more specifically to 2 Sam. 7, the Davidic covenant, where the Lord promises to be David’s Father and God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:31–45</span> What the Lord does through the king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:31 but the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The use of these rhetorical questions is emphatic: there is no one like the Lord (Ex. 15:11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.34"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:34 bow of bronze.</span> Bows were constructed primarily of wood, at times reinforced with metal. The bronze bow is meant to suggest the psalmist’s God-given strength.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.36"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:36 my feet did not slip.</span> Paths are narrow and rocky in Israel, permitting slippage and injury to a soldier. The divinely enabled, steadfast faith of David is illustrated.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:38–40 under my feet . . . turn their backs to me.</span> See text note and Josh. 10:24. Ancient Near Eastern tablets and stone memorials show enemies under the feet of conquerors and bowing before their captors.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.41"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:41 They cried . . . to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Indicates that the psalmist was battling fellow Israelites.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.43"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:43 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page849" title="849" />me.</span> David’s personal imprint is strong here. God granted him victories over neighboring nations that were brought under his rule (2 Sam. 8:1–14).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:46–50</span> Concluding praise of the Lord as refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.49"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:49 among the nations.</span> Quoted by Paul in Rom. 15:9 as fulfilled in Christ, who brings the Gentiles to join in His praise of God the Father.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.18.50"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 18:50 anointed.</span> At his coronation, the king was anointed with oil by the priest. Jesus Christ, David’s Lord and descendant, ultimately fulfills this psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 19</span> The psalm praises the Lord for His two great gifts to humanity: creation and the law. To use modern terminology, the psalm speaks of God’s general revelation in nature and His special revelation in Scripture.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:1–6</span> Celebrates God’s revelation in creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:1 heavens.</span> The psalmist uses creation language here; cf. Gen. 1:1–8, where this word has been translated “expanse.” See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page850">Divine Revelation</a>” on next page.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:2 pours out speech.</span> This metaphor claims that the creation, specifically the heavens, constantly attests God’s power and goodness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:4 all the earth.</span> God’s revelation in creation is open to all who do not suppress it. Paul applies this verse to gospel proclamation (Rom. 10:18).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">set a tent.</span> The sun is personified throughout this section but not deified as in other ancient Near Eastern religions. The context indicates that the reference to the tent is probably an allusion to its absence from the nighttime sky.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:5 like a strong man.</span> Robust and strong as it courses across the sky, the sun is God’s creation. If it is powerful, how much more is God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:6 nothing.</span> Nothing escapes the heat of the sun, and nothing can hide from the Creator.</p>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page850" title="850" />
      <aside>
        <p epub:type="bridgehead">DIVINE REVELATION</p>
        <p class="noind">General revelation provides us with the knowledge that God exists. “The heavens declare the glory of God,” says the psalmist. God’s glory is displayed in the works of His hands. This display is so clear and manifest that no creature can possibly miss it. It unveils God’s eternal power and deity (Romans 1:18–23). Revelation in nature does not give a full revelation of God. It does not give us the information about God the Redeemer that we find in the Bible. But the God who is revealed in nature is the same God who is revealed in Scripture.</p>
        <p>Not everyone in the world has read the Bible or heard the gospel proclaimed. But the light of nature shines upon everyone in every place, in every time. God’s general revelation takes place every day. He is never without a witness to Himself. The visible world is like a mirror that reflects the glory of its maker.</p>
        <p>The world is a stage for God. He is the chief actor who appears front and center. No curtain can fall and obscure His presence. We know from one glimpse of creation that nature is not its own mother. There is no such “mother” as Mother Nature. Nature itself is powerless to produce life of any kind. In itself, nature is barren. The power to produce life resides in the Author of nature—God. To substitute nature as the source of life is to confuse the creature with the Creator. All forms of nature worship are acts of idolatry that are detestable to God.</p>
        <p>Because of the force of general revelation, every human being knows that God exists. Atheism involves the utter denial of something that is known to be true. This is why the Bible says, “The fool has said in his heart, ‘There is no God’” (Psalm 14:1). When the Scripture so chastens the atheist by calling him a “fool,” it is making a moral judgment upon him. To be a fool in biblical terms is not to be dim-witted or lacking in intelligence; it is to be immoral. As the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, so the denial of God is the height of foolishness.</p>
        <p>The agnostic, likewise, denies the force of general revelation. The agnostic is less strident than the atheist; he does not flatly deny the existence of God. Rather, the agnostic declares that there is insufficient evidence to decide one way or the other about God’s existence. He prefers to suspend his judgment, to leave the issue of God’s existence as an open question. However, in light of the clarity of general revelation, the stance of agnosticism is no less detestable to God than that of the militant atheist.</p>
        <p>But for anyone whose mind and heart are open, the glory of God is wonderful to see—from the billions of universes in the heavens to the subatomic particles that make up the tiniest of molecules. What an incredible God we serve.</p>
      </aside>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:7–11</span> Celebrates the Lord’s revelation in Scripture.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:7 law.</span> <span class="italic">Torah</span>, the most general term for God’s instruction. Just as the sun joyfully follows the course set out for it by God, so the Torah lays out the course for man to follow with the same joy.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">reviving the soul.</span> God’s Word transforms the lives of those subject to that Word.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">making wise.</span> Wisdom is not superior intellectual power. God’s Word instills reverence for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:9 fear of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> In a list with law, testimony, precepts, commandment, and rules, the “fear of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” seems out of place. But here the phrase is used objectively; that is, it refers to the body of knowledge about God, in keeping with the fact that to fear God starts with knowing God (see Introduction to Wisdom Literature).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:12, 13 hidden faults . . . presumptuous sins.</span> The psalmist knows that he violates both <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page851" title="851" />consciously and unconsciously God’s teaching enumerated in the previous verses. He prays against both faults.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I shall be blameless.</span> Only by God’s grace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.19.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 19:14 mouth . . . meditation.</span> See note on 1:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 20</span> This psalm was originally used before battle. Two key components in any battle were preparation and implementation. The psalm is organized around these two key components.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:1–5</span> Prayer as preparation for battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:1 you.</span> The king. The congregation calls upon the Lord to bless the king as he sets out for battle. The blessings in these verses are also properly applied to NT believers in their battle of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:2 from the sanctuary.</span> Cf. 1 Kin. 8:44, 45.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:5 shout for joy.</span> The psalms contain hymns of praise sung to God after victories. See, e.g., Pss. 24 and 98.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:6–9</span> Faith as implementation in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:6 the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">saves.</span> Dependence on the Lord is the fundamental attitude.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">anointed.</span> The Davidic king, anticipating the Son of David who reigns forever, Jesus Christ.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:7 Some trust in chariots.</span> The attitude of self-reliance is an ever present danger.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">we trust in the name.</span> The believer’s rescue from sin and Satan, like Israel’s deliverance from enemies, is grounded in God’s trustworthiness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:9</span> Prayer as preparation for battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.20.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 20:9 O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">, save . . . May he answer us.</span> This shift of persons in address is not uncommon in the psalms.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 21</span> This psalm is a song of thanksgiving sung in response to victory that God granted in answer to the prayer offered in Ps. 20. The key theme is the Lord’s strength.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:1–7</span> The king’s joy in the Lord’s strength.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:1 king.</span> The “king” of this verse” is the “king” of 20:9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:2 heart’s desire.</span> Similar language is used in 20:4, “May he grant you your heart’s desire.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page852" title="852" />meet him.</span> The picture is that of God meeting the king as the king returns victorious from battle.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">set a crown . . . upon his head.</span> While some think this verse is about a coronation, it probably refers to the king’s transition from a general (who does not wear his crown) to a king sitting on his throne.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:4 asked life of you . . . forever and ever.</span> The Hebrew word translated “asked” echoes the Hebrew word translated “petitions” in 20:5. The king prays that his life will be spared during battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:5 splendor and majesty.</span> See note on 8:5.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:8–13</span> The king’s victory in the Lord’s strength.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.21.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 21:13 your strength.</span> A repetition from v. 1, forming an inclusion around the entire poem and focusing on its key theme, the Lord’s strength.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 22</span> This psalm is well known for its many citations and allusions in the NT (Matt. 27:35, 39, 43, 46; John 19:23, 24, 28; Heb. 2:12). The first half focuses on pain in the face of unanswered prayer (vv. 1–21), then there is the shift, typical of the lament, to a focus on praise for answered prayer (vv. 22–31). The psalm, like Ps. 69, is applied to the suffering of Christ, the Son of David, dying at the hands of wicked men.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:1–21</span> Pain in the face of unanswered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:1 why have you forsaken me.</span> The psalmist cries in anguish the “Why?” of the righteous sufferer. Where is the presence God has promised (Josh. 1:5)? The cry is taken up by Jesus, who knew the reality of a total abandonment that was only partial with David (Matt. 27:46; Mark 15:34). In the place of David and all the people of God, Jesus bore the dreadful curse that sin deserves.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:3 enthroned on the praises.</span> God’s kingship exists before any human acclamation, but His reign becomes manifest to worshipers through their praises.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:4, 5 our fathers.</span> David could think of the time that Abraham was delivered from the five kings (Gen. 14), Joseph from the Egyptian prison (Gen. 41), and most of all Moses and Israel from the land of Egypt (Ex. 1–15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:7 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page853" title="853" />mock.</span> His enemies ridicule his trust in God. This experience is alluded to in Matt. 27:41–44, as Christ had to endure the ridicule of hypocritical priests and criminals.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:9 from the womb.</span> He affirms a long-standing trust in God’s ability to save him. He has had confidence in God as far back as he can remember.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:12 bulls of Bashan.</span> Bulls noted for their power and size (Amos 4:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:13 roaring lion.</span> Often representing power, ferocity, and ruthlessness in the Bible and the ancient Near East (Nah. 2:10–13; Zeph. 3:3). Scripture can also use the image of the lion for the power and glory of the Messiah (cf. Rev. 5:5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:14 my bones . . . my heart.</span> Outward attack is matched by inward agony. The figures, as used by David, reflect the inward turmoil induced by the encircling threat of his enemies. As fulfilled in Christ, the prophetic words describe the agony of the crucified one.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:16 pierced.</span> The traditional Hebrew reading may reflect an inadvertent copyist’s error, for it reads lit. “like a lion” (text note). The Septuagint suggests that the correct reading is “pierced.” For more on the process of copying the text of the OT, see Introduction to 1 Chronicles: Special Issues and the topical article “Old Testament Textual Criticism” on p. 2372</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:21 You have rescued.</span> The assurance of being heard is also present in other psalms of lament (3:4; 28:6; cf. 27:13; 34:4, 6; 38:15; 118:5, 21).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:22–31</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page854" title="854" />Praise in the light of answered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:22 I will tell.</span> The thankful praise of the psalmist will be offered as the payment of his vows (v. 25). In Heb. 2:12 this verse is applied to Christ, who leads the praise of the great congregation.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">praise.</span> The first of three uses of praise in this concluding stanza (see vv. 23, 25).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:23 praise.</span> The second of three uses of praise in this concluding stanza (see vv. 22, 25).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:24 has not hidden his face.</span> Christ’s enemies despised Him, but God did not.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:25 praise.</span> The third of three uses of praise in this concluding stanza (see vv. 22, 23).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my vows I will perform.</span> Mention of vows is common in psalms of lament (13:6; 27:6; 35:18; 54:6; 69:30, 31; cf. 51:16; 116:13, 14). The sufferer promises to bring thanksgiving when his prayer is answered (Lev. 7:16; 22:23; Deut. 12:6, 7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:26 shall eat and be satisfied.</span> A reference to the sacrificial meal of the OT peace offering when the vow is paid and the worshipers are included.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:27 All the ends of the earth.</span> The scope of praise expands, showing the prophetic reference to Christ and the NT church.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.22.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 22:31 he has done it.</span> The final victory of salvation is accomplished by Christ (John 19:30).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 23</span> Perhaps the best-known example of a psalm of confidence (Introduction: Genre). It is a literary unity, with two governing metaphors expressing God’s care and goodness: the shepherd (vv. 1–4) and the host (vv. 5, 6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:1–4.</span> These verses focus on the Lord as shepherd.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:1 shepherd.</span> The image of God as shepherd is inexhaustibly rich. The shepherd stays with the flock (Is. 40:11; 63:9–12). His sheep are totally dependent upon him for food, water, and protection from wild animals. The image of shepherd also evoked the image of king in the ancient world. David was tending sheep when he was anointed to be king. In the NT Jesus is revealed as the shepherd of His church (John 10:11, 14), fulfilling the prophecy that God will come to shepherd His people (Ezek. 34:7–16, 23).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:2 green pastures.</span> Where the sheep get necessary food.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">still waters.</span> Lit. “Waters of resting places” (text note), referring to the place where sheep get both the water and rest that they need.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page855" title="855" />restores my soul.</span> This idiom refers to the physical renewal that sheep experience once they get the needed food, water, and rest mentioned in the previous verse (see Lam. 1:11, 19, which translates this idiom “to revive their strength”).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:4 valley of the shadow of death.</span> See Job 10:21, 22.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">rod . . . staff.</span> The rod was used to fight wild animals and the staff to direct the flock.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:5, 6</span> Focuses on the Lord as host.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:5 table.</span> The image shifts to that of a banquet, a victory celebration.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">anoint.</span> Guests were anointed at feasts (104:15; Luke 7:46).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.23.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 23:6 I shall dwell.</span> Like the sheep with its shepherd, the psalmist quiets himself in God’s assurance of an eternal home with Him. See John 14:23; theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page991">The Goodness of God</a>” on p. 991.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 24</span> This psalm gives us a glimpse into the liturgical life of ancient Israel, as it was part of an entrance liturgy (see Pss. 15; 68:24, 25). Jesus alone is qualified to ascend to heaven (vv. 3, 4), and He is the victorious Lord, for whom the gates of glory open (vv. 7–10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:1, 2</span> Confessing the Creator-King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:1 The earth is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">’s.</span> God created and sustains the whole earth; it belongs to Him. Paul cites this verse to establish the principle that there is no food, even things offered to pagan idols, that is unlawful for Christians to eat (1 Cor. 10:25, 26).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:2 he has founded it upon the seas.</span> This section reflects the creation account in Gen. 1. However, the sea is also a poetic image for the chaos that God conquers and transforms into cosmic order. Throughout the Psalms and the Prophets, God is pictured as winning a victory over the sea (29:10, 11; 77:16–20; 104:5–9; Nah. 1:4; Dan. 7). It is this victory that will be referenced in v. 8, “mighty in battle.”</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:3–6</span> Approaching the Creator-King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:3 Who shall ascend.</span> In the ancient world, there were often qualifications for entering sacred space. This question may have been asked by the king, who would have been leading the procession to the sanctuary.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">holy place.</span> The sanctuary.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:4 He who has.</span> The answer to the question in v. 3 would have been provided by the gatekeeper at the sanctuary.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">clean hands . . . pure heart.</span> Righteous actions, thoughts, and motives.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">lift up his soul.</span> An idiom for placing one’s trust in someone (see 25:1, 2).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">deceitfully.</span> By the names of false gods.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:5 righteousness.</span> Since at its core “righteousness” is right order, and since it is coupled with “blessing” in this verse, “righteousness” here may mean “prosperity” (see Prov. 8:18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:6 Such is the generation.</span> The king as the representative of the people would have answered in the affirmative that the worshipers meet the qualifications for entrance into the sanctuary.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:7–10</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page856" title="856" />Welcoming the Creator-King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:7 Lift up your heads.</span> The gatekeeper would have given instructions for the gates to be opened to the newly arriving worshipers. “Heads” are either the personified gates of the sanctuary that are to be opened or, more likely, a metonym for the gatekeepers to lift their heads in honor of the entering and victorious king.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">may come in.</span> The return of the King of glory implies that He has gone out to battle and returns in victory.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.24.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 24:8 mighty in battle.</span> Refers to God’s victory over the sea (see v. 2 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 25</span> This psalm has clear divisions based on change of address: 25:1–7, second-person address; 25:8–15, third-person address; and 25:16–22, second-person address. Verse 11 is the exception in that it is second-person address in the middle of a third-person stanza, which marks out this verse as the center of the poem.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:1–7</span> The psalmist’s plea.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:1 lift up my soul.</span> Coupled with “I trust” in the next verse, to lift up the soul is an affirmation of faith (see 24:4).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:4 ways . . . paths.</span> Ps. 25 has a number of themes common to the Wisdom Literature, way or path being one of them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:5 salvation.</span> The salvation that the psalmist hopes for is deliverance from his current distress (see vv. 16–21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:6 Remember . . . mercy . . . steadfast love.</span> Mercy and steadfast love are closely connected with God’s covenant, which is the basis of the psalmist’s trust.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:7 sins of my youth.</span> The prophets repeat the promise that God will not remember His people’s sins (Is. 43:25; Jer. 31:34; Ezek. 37:15–23).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">goodness.</span> The use of this word links the psalmist’s plea to the next section on God’s character, which starts by affirming that God is “good” (v. 8).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:8–15</span> God’s goodness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:8 Good.</span> God’s goodness is the theme in numerous psalms (27:13; 34:8; 54:6; 86:5; 100:5; 106:1; 107:1; 118:1, 29; 136:1; 145:9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:9 way.</span> See v. 4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:10 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page857" title="857" />his covenant . . . testimonies.</span> His revealed will for our lives; that is, the law as set forth in the Pentateuch.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:11 pardon my guilt.</span> The central line in the poem, which focuses attention on the central concept, the forgiveness of sin (see vv. 7, 18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:12 fears the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Cf. Prov. 1:7; Eccl. 12:13. The fear of the Lord is reverence and awe toward God, not life-disrupting anxiety. See also note on 111:10.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:13 inherit the land.</span> The blessings and curses of Deut. 27; 28 make clear that Israel will keep the land given them by God if they remain faithful to His covenant (cf. v. 10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:14 makes known to them his covenant.</span> Each time Abraham doubted God’s ability to fulfill the promises of Gen. 12:1–3, God appeared to him and renewed the covenant (Gen. 15; 17).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:16–22</span> The psalmist’s plea.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:18, 19 sins . . . foes.</span> He recognizes that his troubles are caused by both his own sins and the attacks of outside forces (the “foes”).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:21 integrity and uprightness.</span> In relative terms the psalmist was a person of integrity and uprightness; however, this is not an affirmation of sinlessness, as is clear from the awareness of sin in vv. 7, 8, 18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.25.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 25:22 Redeem Israel.</span> The poet broadens the scope from his own need of redemption to that of the people of God as a whole.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 26</span> This psalm is concentrically arranged vv. 1–3, 6–8, and 11, 12 have the psalmist and the Lord in view, while verses 4, 5 and 9, 10 have the psalmist and sinners in view. The inclusion (see 26:1 note) articulates the heart of the psalm: because of the psalmist’s integrity and innocence, he is certain of coming out on top in the situation he faces.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:1–3</span> Protestation of innocence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:1 in my integrity.</span> See note on 25:21. The psalmist identifies himself in motive and action with the righteous rather than the wicked. He invites God to test the truth of this claim (v. 2) and has no illusions of being sinless (25:7, 8, 11, 18) or of having no need for mercy (v. 11; 25:6, 7).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I have trusted.</span> See 25:2.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Prove . . . try . . . test.</span> Cf. 139:23, 24.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:4, 5</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page858" title="858" />Avoidance of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:4 I do not sit.</span> Cf. 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:6–8</span> Protestation of innocence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:6 your altar.</span> The language fits a prayer for admission to the sanctuary, as in Pss. 15; 24.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:8–10</span> Avoidance of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:9 sinners.</span> He wants to distance himself from the wicked, for if they enter the sanctuary precincts (vv. 6–8), they will be quickly destroyed. The psalmist asks to be spared this judgment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:11, 12</span> Protestation of innocence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:11 integrity.</span> The repetition of this word from v. 1 signals the beginning of the conclusion to the poem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.26.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 26:12 level ground.</span> A metaphor for personal stability and right relationship with the Lord.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the great assembly.</span> Cf. 68:27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 27</span> A psalm of confidence comprised of five strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): confidence in the Lord (v. 1), confidence in spite of enemies (vv. 2, 3), confidence in the sanctuary (vv. 4–6), confidence in prayer (vv. 7–12), and confidence in the Lord (vv. 13, 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:1</span> This verse focuses on confidence in the Lord, as do the final verses (vv. 13, 14).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">light.</span> God brings clarity, order, and understanding, while darkness is evil and chaotic. See Nah. 1:8, where the defeat of enemies is shown by their being pursued into darkness. Also see theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter04.xhtml#page172">The Holiness of God</a>” on p. 172.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">salvation.</span> Here the word “salvation” means deliverance from the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:2, 3</span> These verses focus on confidence in spite of enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:2 eat up my flesh.</span> The enemy seeks the physical harm of the psalmist. The expression also has a figurative meaning: “to slander me.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:3 I will be confident.</span> The Hebrew verb is the same as that translated “trust” in previous psalms (25:2; 26:1).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:4–6</span> These verses focus on confidence found in the presence of God in the sanctuary.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:4 house of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The place where God’s presence is manifest is a place of sanctuary from the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page859" title="859" />lift me high.</span> Above all trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:6 sacrifices.</span> The sacrifices are those of thanksgiving in response to answered prayer and deliverance from the enemy (see 26:7).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:7–12</span> These verses express confidence in prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:8 face.</span> To seek God’s face is to seek intimate fellowship with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:9 Hide not your face.</span> The psalmist recognizes that however great his desire, he can see God’s face only if God reveals it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:11 teach me . . . lead me . . . path.</span> See 25:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:13, 14</span> Returns to the theme of the opening strophe by expressing confidence in the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:13 goodness of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalmist is confident of experiencing God’s goodness (see 25:7, 8) while he is still alive.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.27.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 27:14 Wait for the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> His counsel is that in the midst of present trouble, one should not give up but rather give God time to answer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 28</span> Follows Pss. 26; 27 as a third psalm that expresses the prayer of one falsely accused. Ps. 28 can be divided into two strophes (vv. 1–5 and vv. 6–9; see Introduction to Hebrew Poetry). His pleas for mercy, repeated in v. 6 from v. 2, mark the beginning of the second strophe. Verses 1–5 express the prayer, and vv. 6–9 celebrate the answer.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:1–5</span> These verses are the prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:1 my rock.</span> Using this familiar name, the psalmist remembers God as his source of protection and strength (78:35; Deut. 32:4, 18, 31).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page860" title="860" />go down to the pit.</span> That is, to die. The pit stands for Sheol, the grave (6:5 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:2 holy sanctuary.</span> The Most Holy Place, the inner room in the tabernacle or temple where the ark of the covenant stood.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:3 speak peace.</span> The psalmist knows the hypocrisy of his enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:4 render them.</span> An imprecation, that is, a prayer that God will punish the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:5 he will tear them down.</span> The previous verse appealed for judgment, and this one pronounces it, not out of a sense of personal vengeance but out of regard for God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:6–9</span> These verses are the answer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:6 Blessed be the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> God is praised for having blessed the psalmist and is worshiped in anticipation of His blessing His people (v. 9).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">pleas for mercy.</span> The pleas for mercy offered in v. 2 have been answered.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:7 trusts.</span> See 26:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.28.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 28:9 your people.</span> The psalmist broadens his appeal to the Lord to include the whole nation.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Be their shepherd.</span> See note on 23:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 29</span> A hymn to God the king, the psalm falls into three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a call to worship (vv. 1, 2), a description of the Lord’s theophanic presence in a thunderstorm (vv. 3–9), and an affirmation of the Lord’s kingship (vv. 10, 11). The psalm uses themes that were current in the religions of the nations surrounding ancient Israel: the power behind storms (vv. 3–9) and the victor over floodwaters (vv. 10, 11). The psalmist counters these religions by taking the praises they claimed for their false gods and ascribing them to the Lord. The picture of God as king, enthroned over the vanquished floodwaters, is one of many indications that the psalm was used to celebrate a divinely given victory in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:1, 2</span> These verses are a call to worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:1 Ascribe to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Not to other deities, particularly Baal, the rain god of the Canaanites.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">heavenly beings.</span> Lit. “sons of gods” (text note). This phrase is used in the religious texts of the Canaanites and refers to the gods of their pantheon. In the Bible it refers to spiritual beings such as the cherubim and the angels.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">glory and strength.</span> The glory and strength that will be manifested in the storm of vv. 3–9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:2 name.</span> This is God’s reputation achieved through His acts in history.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">splendor of holiness.</span> That is, when His holiness appears in the storm about to be described.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:3–9</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page861" title="861" />These verses are a description of the Lord’s theophanic presence in a thunderstorm. The Canaanites believed that Baal provided rain and fertility and that his power was seen in the storm. They called him “cloud rider” in their religious texts (see 68:4 note for this appellation applied to the Lord; see also 104:3). But the Lord controls nature (1 Kin. 18). This strophe is made up of seven lines to underscore the perfection of God’s presence in the storm. The storm brews over the Mediterranean and dissipates over the eastern desert.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:3 voice of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Thunder.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">waters.</span> In the religions of the ancient Near East, the sea represented forces of chaos and evil. The Bible uses the metaphors of “sea” and “waters” similarly. See 18:4; 46:2; 69:1, 2 and notes.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the God of glory.</span> God’s glory is manifested in the storm.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">many waters.</span> The phrase is used for the Mediterranean, where the storm starts, and for the hostility that opposes God’s well-ordered world (93:4).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:4 powerful . . . majesty.</span> God’s strength and glory are manifested in the storm; see v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:5 Lebanon.</span> The storm has moved over land.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:6 Sirion.</span> Mount Hermon in the anti-Lebanon range. The storm has moved further east.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:7 flames of fire.</span> Lightning.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:8 wilderness of Kadesh.</span> Lit. “holy desert.” Though its precise location is uncertain, it must be in the high desert plateau to the east of Mount Hermon, given the track of the storm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:10, 11</span> A prayer for strength and peace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:10 flood.</span> The Hebrew word translated “flood” in this verse is used elsewhere only in the story of Noah’s flood, though that story is not in view here. The word links to the “many waters” in v. 4, which were the celestial waters that sourced the waters that fell at the time of the flood and that fall in every rainstorm. That the Lord sits enthroned over these waters is an affirmation that He, not Baal, controls them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.29.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 29:11 strength.</span> The strength manifested in the storm (vv. 3, 4) is the strength that is available to God’s people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">bless . . . with peace.</span> The provision of rain was the provision of Hebrew <span class="italic">shalom</span>, in this context the agricultural success that would be the foundation of political and military success. For the idea of blessing with <span class="italic">shalom</span>, see the beginning and ending of the Aaronic benediction (Num. 6:24–26).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 30</span> The title indicates that the psalm was written for the dedication of the <span class="italic">bayit</span> (“house”), usually understood to be the temple. In David’s time the temple had not yet been built, but the psalm could have been composed for the dedication of the tabernacle at some point (see Josh 6:24; Judg. 18:31; 1 Sam 1:7 where this Hebrew word is used for the tabernacle); or David could have prepared the song for the dedication of the temple much as he prepared for building it by gathering supplies (1 Chr. 22). Of greater difficulty is the lack of any mention of the temple in the body of the psalm (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes) and that the psalm is a song of thanksgiving for healing. It is possible that the song was composed for the dedication of the tabernacle, a dedication delayed by severe illness, such that thanksgiving for healing and the dedication of the tabernacle converged. Attempts to link the psalm with the plague recorded in 1 Chr. 21:1—22:1 fail to take into account that David himself was not afflicted. Ps. 30 is a psalm of thanksgiving for recovery from illness, comprised of two stanzas (vv. 1–5 and vv. 6–12), each having two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry). The strophes in the second stanza (vv. 6–10 and vv. 11, 12) expand on the content of the corresponding strophes in the first stanza (vv. 1–3 and vv. 4, 5).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:1–5</span> A general recounting of distress and deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:1 drawn me up.</span> The Hebrew verb is used of drawing a bucket out of a well, an appropriate portrayal of saving someone from Sheol, which is often pictured as a wet and muddy pit.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:2 healed me.</span> An indication that the psalm is a thanksgiving in response to physical healing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page862" title="862" />soul.</span> See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter45.xhtml#page1948">Human Beings as Body and Soul</a>” on p. 1948.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">down to the pit.</span> That is, die (see 28:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:4 saints.</span> The word is related to lovingkindness and specifies those in covenant relationship with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:5, 6 anger . . . moment . . . favor . . . lifetime . . . Weeping . . . night . . . joy . . . morning.</span> With four matching thoughts the poet beautifully articulates the reversal of his circumstances and the triumph of mercy over judgment (James 2:13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:6–12</span> A detailed recounting of distress and deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:6 prosperity . . . never be moved.</span> The mistake of presuming on God’s grace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:7 my mountain.</span> Mountains, as opposed to the sea, are a symbol of stability and often represent security in the protection of God (46:2). The sense is, “You made me as strong as a mountain.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">hid your face.</span> An idiom for the absence of divine favor (13:1; 27:9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:9 profit.</span> The psalmist bargains with God for his life (Gen. 18) by pointing out that God would gain a voice of praise if He healed him. This is not a developed treatment of the afterlife. The point is that death would bring to a conclusion David’s desire to glorify God in this world.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">down to the pit.</span> Sheol of v. 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:11 mourning . . . dancing . . . sackcloth . . . gladness.</span> With two more matching thoughts, the poet beautifully articulates the reversal of his circumstances and the triumph of mercy over judgment (James 2:13); see vv. 5, 6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.30.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 30:12 not be silent.</span> As would be the case if David had died (see v. 9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 31</span> A song of thanksgiving for deliverance from trouble that can be divided into two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a prayer of trust for deliverance (vv. 1–18) and thanksgiving for answer to that prayer (vv. 19–24).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:1–18</span> These verses are a prayer of trust for deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:1 your righteousness.</span> The psalmist appeals to the Lord’s righteousness in his distress caused by the wickedness of the enemy. “Your righteousness” indicates God’s commitment to save those in covenant relationship with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page863" title="863" />I commit my spirit.</span> Jesus quoted these words on the cross (Luke 23:46). The desperate cries of lament found in the psalms often express Christ’s anguish as He faced the rejection of the world (Pss. 22; 69).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:6 worthless idols.</span> See Jon. 2:8. They are worthless because they are the figments of their worshipers’ imaginations. The psalmist trusts the Lord, who is “faithful” (v. 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:7 steadfast love.</span> Specifically, the love between covenant partners (God and David), which moves God to respond to the psalmist’s distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:10 iniquity.</span> Several ancient translations read “affliction,” which draws support from the psalm’s general theme of distress from outside forces rather than from the psalmist’s guilt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:12 broken vessel.</span> A metaphor for serious illness, even death (Eccl. 12:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:14 You are my God.</span> A simple and foundational confession that David is in covenant with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:15 My times.</span> The psalmist knows that God controls history in general and his life in particular. This comforts him in his distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:16 face shine.</span> See the priestly blessing of Num. 6:25. The metaphor of God’s face represents His loving presence that will bring salvation to the psalmist.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:19–24</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page864" title="864" />These verses offer thanksgiving for answered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:21 besieged city.</span> This phrase is difficult to understand. The psalmist could be remembering a particular incident. It may be that the original reading was “in a difficult time,” a rendering that fits the context well. A copyist’s error in one letter would account for the difference of reading.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.31.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 31:23 his saints.</span> The word is formed from the same Hebrew root (<span class="italic">hesed</span>) as “steadfast love,” understood as God’s lovingkindness toward those in covenant relationship with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 32</span> The etymology of the Hebrew word <span class="italic">maskil</span> suggests the idea of “insight.” A <span class="italic">maskil</span> may be an instructional poem. That certainly fits this psalm with its distinctive wisdom language (vv. 1, 2, 8–10) and explicit references to instructing and teaching in v. 8. Ps. 32 has characteristics of both wisdom and thanksgiving psalms. The first stanza (vv. 1–5) contains a beatitude characteristic of wisdom psalms (vv. 1, 2) and a recounting of distress and deliverance characteristic of thanksgiving psalms (vv. 3–5). The second stanza (vv. 6–11) contains three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a call to prayer characteristic of thanksgiving psalms (vv. 6, 7), instruction characteristic of wisdom psalms (vv. 8–10), and a call to rejoice characteristic of thanksgiving psalms (v. 11).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:1–5</span> Teaches the blessedness of sins forgiven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:1 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:2 iniquity.</span> Three different words for sin are used in the first two verses to bring out the many aspects of man’s rebellion against God. Paul cites the first two verses of this psalm in Rom. 4:6–8 in describing the grace of God’s forgiveness.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">no deceit.</span> With regard to the presence of sin in particular.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:3 when I kept silent.</span> With regard to the confession of sin in particular.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my bones wasted away.</span> The psalmist perceives sin’s consequences in his body. This is not merely poetic language, although sin does not always have immediate physical consequences.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:4 my strength was . . . heat.</span> Guilt immobilized and weakened the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page865" title="865" />I acknowledged my sin to you.</span> God’s discipline brought the psalmist to a willingness to confess.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you forgave.</span> 1 John 1:9 says, “If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:6–11</span> These verses provide instruction for avoiding deep water.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:6 Therefore.</span> Based on his experience, the psalmist will now teach others to learn from his mistakes.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">godly.</span> Or “saints”; see 31:23 note.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">great waters.</span> Elsewhere translated “many waters.” See notes on 18:4, 16; 29:3, 10; 46:2; 69:1, 2; 144:7. Here the phrase carries overtones of hostile waters (see 29:3 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:8 I will instruct you.</span> Using language found in wisdom sections of the OT (e.g., Ps. 1 and Prov. 1–9), God promises to direct the psalmist in the way of the covenant, in the way of righteousness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:9 like a horse.</span> Horses and mules do the will of their masters only under compulsion (Prov. 26:3). The righteous should obey out of love and gratitude to their God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.32.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 32:11 glad . . . rejoice . . . joy.</span> All can be experienced through the confession of sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 33</span> There are twenty-two verses in the psalm, the same as the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet, so it could be called a modified acrostic (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry). The lack of a title and the repetition of vocabulary in 32:11 and 33:1 tie the two psalms together. Ps. 33 is a hymn of praise in response to the call to praise in 32:11.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:1–3</span> A call to praise.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:1–3 Shout . . . Praise . . . Give thanks . . . make melody . . . Sing . . . play skillfully.</span> As is typical of the hymn, this psalm starts with an extended invitation to praise God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:3 new song.</span> Often such “new” songs are found in contexts of victorious war and can be seen as shouts of victory. Cf. Pss. 96; 98; 144; 149; Is. 42:10; Rev. 5:9; 14:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:4, 5</span> Offers praise for who God is.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">For.</span> The content of praise in a hymn is often signaled by the word “for.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">upright . . . faithfulness . . . righteousness . . . justice . . . steadfast love.</span> Since all these terms characterize God, they also characterize His word and His works, a number of which are enumerated in the verses that follow.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:6–9</span> Offers praise for what God has done in His work of creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:6 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page866" title="866" />By the word.</span> God’s first work, creation, was carried out by His word, so His word is not only “upright” (v. 4) but also powerful.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">all their host.</span> Lit. “hosts.” May refer not merely to the innumerable stars of heaven but also to the angelic armies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:7 waters of the sea.</span> The Creator is pictured poetically as exercising command over the waters of chaos (18:16 note). There may also be a poetical allusion to the song of Moses and Israel at the Red Sea (Ex. 15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:8 fear the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> To know, revere, and obey Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:10–12</span> Offers praise for God’s counsel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:10 nations.</span> Godless nations who seek their own will and not God’s.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:11 The counsel of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">stands forever.</span> Elsewhere the underlying Hebrew phrase is translated “purpose of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” or “plan of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” (cf. Is. 19:17; Jer. 49:20; 50:45). Nothing can subvert God’s purposes. He is in absolute control of history.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:12 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the people whom he has chosen.</span> God is the one who initiated the relationship with Israel, the nation He chose (Deut. 7:7–11).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:13–19</span> Offers praise for God’s watchful eye.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:13 looks down from heaven.</span> Elsewhere in the Psalms, God looks down from heaven to have compassion on His people (80:14; 102:19; cf. Lam. 3:50).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:15</span> Teaches that God not only sees all but also forms the hearts of all.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:18 eye of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> When the Lord looks down from heaven, He is not looking to find those who are strong (v. 16) but to watch over those who fear Him and hope in Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:20–22</span> The response to praise: hope.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.33.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 33:22 hope.</span> Since God looks down with care on those who hope in Him (v. 18), believers wait for Him (v. 20) and trust in Him (v. 21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 34</span> The psalm has a historical title (see below), but the verses themselves are written in a general style, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page867" title="867" />lending the poem to use by different people in different situations. The psalm is an acrostic (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes), although there is no line for the sixth Hebrew letter (<span class="italic">waw</span>), and the line for the seventeenth letter is out of order, coming last and starting a Hebrew word for “redeem,” the word that brings the acrostic Ps. 25 to a close (v. 22). Like Ps. 32, Ps. 34 has characteristics of a thanksgiving psalm (vv. 1–7) and a wisdom psalm (vv. 8–22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:title</span> See 1 Sam. 21:10–15 for the historical situation of the title. Abimelech is probably a royal title for the king of the Philistines, not the proper name of the king (Achish, in the time of Samuel).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:1–7</span> Expresses thanksgiving for deliverance from trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:2 boast in the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> While boasting in oneself is the height of pride and godlessness (Rom. 1:30), boasting in God is right (Jer. 9:24; 2 Cor. 10:17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:3 his name.</span> God’s reputation. The congregation is exhorted to witness to God’s great acts in history and in their lives.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:4 he answered me.</span> One of the most frequent themes of the psalms is stated boldly: God hears and answers the prayers of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:5 are radiant.</span> They reflect the Lord’s shining upon them (31:16 note). Radiance reflects the joy of God’s revealed presence, while the sense of God’s withdrawal brings the darkness of shame.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:6 This poor man.</span> The psalmist, who had no power to save himself.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:7 angel of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> One of God’s heavenly hosts.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">those who fear him.</span> Those who know, revere, and obey Him. Gehazi learned the truth of this verse when Elisha prayed for his eyes to be opened and showed him the army of the Lord (2 Kin. 6:8–23).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:8–22</span> Provides instruction for fearing the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:8 taste.</span> The psalmist describes his personal experience of God’s goodness. After tasting God’s goodness in Christ, Peter alludes to this passage (1 Pet. 2:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:10 young lions.</span> The strong and ruthless do not always get what they want, but God’s people lack nothing that is good for them.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">lack no.</span> See 23:1. See also Deut. 8:9; Prov. 28:27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:11 children, listen.</span> Lit. “sons, listen.” A common and poetic form of address in the Wisdom Literature (e.g., Prov. 5:7; 7:24; 8:32).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:12 see good.</span> An expression that has the idea of experiencing joy and pleasure in life; see 4:6; 106:5; also Job 7:7; 9:25. See also Eccl. 2:1, 24; 3:13; 5:18, where the expression is translated “find enjoyment” or the like.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:17 delivers them out of all their troubles.</span> As he had done for the psalmist (v. 6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:20 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page868" title="868" />not one . . . is broken.</span> John 19:36 applies this verse to Christ, the only perfect, righteous man.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.34.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 34:22 none . . . will be condemned.</span> See Rom. 8:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 35</span> A lament by one whose life is threatened. The psalm uses powerful imagery to express the agony of false accusation. The psalm has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry), each of which ends with praise: call for help (vv. 1–10), cry of the soul (vv. 11–18), and call for justice (vv. 19–28).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:1 Contend.</span> A legal term that means “bring a case against someone.” Such language runs through the psalm (vv. 11–16, 23, 24), as David commits his case to God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">fight.</span> The psalmist calls upon the Lord to wage war in his behalf.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:2 rise.</span> A request that occurs in many of the psalms in the setting of warfare (cf. 3:7; 7:6; 12:5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:3 your salvation.</span> In the particular context, this phrase indicates victory in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:5 like chaff.</span> Easily scattered and unable to stand. See 1:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:7 without cause.</span> The Lord’s righteous servant has done no evil to his enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:8 Let destruction come upon him.</span> The enemies’ evil intentions turn back on them. Their evil becomes their judgment, a frequent theme in the Prophets and Wisdom Literature. If they dig a pit for someone, they will fall into it themselves. See 7:14–16; 34:21.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:10 who is like you.</span> Cf. Ex. 15:11, in another divine warrior psalm. Verses 9, 10 anticipate the sure victory of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:11 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page869" title="869" />Malicious witnesses.</span> The law condemns circulating false reports (Ex. 23:1). “Malicious” indicates the cruelty of such witnesses who want to harm the defendant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:12 evil for good.</span> The height of injustice; cf. 38:20; 109:5; also Gen. 44:4; 1 Sam. 25:21; Prov. 17:13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:13, 14</span> The psalmist did no evil to those who now attack him; he actively and sacrificially pursued their well-being.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:18 the great congregation.</span> Similarly, 68:26 says, “Bless God in the great congregation.” See also 22:22; 26:12.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:19–28</span> These verses are a call for justice.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:19 wink the eye.</span> Taunting the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:20 do not speak peace.</span> A technical term in ancient treaties. They are breaking their covenant agreement.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:27 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page870" title="870" />Great is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> A standard affirmation in worship (40:16; 48:1, 7; 96:4; 145:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.35.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 35:28 my tongue shall tell.</span> The deliverance has not yet come, but the psalmist is singing praises to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 36</span> The psalm is a meditation on and prayer for the steadfast love of God (vv. 5, 7, 10). It has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a reflection of the attitudes and actions of the wicked (vv. 1–4), a meditation on the Lord’s steadfast love (vv. 5–9), and a prayer for the Lord’s steadfast love (vv. 10–12).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:1–4</span> These verses are a reflection of the attitudes and actions of the wicked</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:1 no fear of God.</span> The psalmist identifies the root of all evil, just as Prov. 1:7 cites the fear of God as the beginning of all knowledge. The fear of God that springs from faith is a special response to revelation, the reverential awe that recognizes total dependence upon the Lord. In the absence of reverence, a different type of fear of the Lord will be experienced, namely, dread.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:3 trouble . . . wisely.</span> Wisdom has an ethical side: to be wise is to do good.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:4 on his bed.</span> Wickedness is a full-time occupation. Even at night, when they should be praying before sleep, wicked people plot and scheme.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:5–9</span> These verses are a meditation on the Lord’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:5 steadfast love.</span> A special word in Hebrew, signifying the loving devotion in which God binds Himself to His people. It indicates His lovingkindness toward those with whom He is in covenant relationship. This word recurs throughout Psalms, showing that it is a book of covenantal prayers.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:6 mountains . . . great deep.</span> That is, very high and very low. “Mountains of God” is a way of expressing the superlative: highest mountains.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:7 wings.</span> This seems to refer to the wings of the cherubim of God’s throne, as represented by the beings depicted as covering the ark of the covenant with their wings (Ex. 25:10–22). Otherwise, God is perceived as the protector of His people, like a mother bird who protects her young brood (cf. Ruth 2:12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:8 feast on the abundance.</span> The psalmist pictures God as a rich and generous host.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">river of your delights.</span> The word for “delights” is a play on the word for Eden.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:9 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page871" title="871" />fountain of life.</span> God is the source of all life. The doctrine of eternal life is more fully revealed in the NT (e.g., Matt. 22:31, 32; Luke 23:42, 43; John 3:16; Rev. 21:3–7; 22:3–5). See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter47.xhtml#page2040">The Last Resurrection</a>” on p. 2040.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:10–12</span> These verses are a prayer for Lord’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.36.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 36:10 continue.</span> Lit. “drag” and then “extend in time.” See Jer. 31:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 37</span> An instructional poem from the wisdom tradition and acrostic (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes), written primarily in couplets.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:1 Fret not.</span> Seeing the wicked prosper and not the righteous might lead one to fret, especially in light of the promises of passages such as Ps. 1. This psalm shows that the righteous must wait until the new heavens and earth for the promises made to them to be fully realized. Until then, many wicked people will enjoy outward prosperity. Even though righteous people are often blessed on this side of glory, there will be times when prosperity is not forthcoming and they will have to wait upon the Lord (v. 7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:2 grass.</span> The metaphor is apt. In Israel the grass comes up and flourishes in the winter, but in the summer it is withered by the sun.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:3 Trust.</span> The prosperity of the wicked calls us to walk by faith and not by sight.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:8 anger.</span> Perhaps against God or evildoers.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">tends only to evil.</span> Anger is a dangerous force (James 1:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:9 cut off.</span> A technical term meaning “to be exiled,” “to be excommunicated from society,” or even “to be executed” (Gen. 17:14; Lev. 17:14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:10 just a little while.</span> The wicked may prosper in the short run but not in the long run. See v. 34.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:11 the meek shall inherit the land.</span> Land and its cultivation form the basis of physical life. This verse is used in Matt. 5:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:13 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page872" title="872" />the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">laughs at the wicked.</span> See 2:4. Vivid human language describes the folly of rebellion against the Almighty. God is not threatened, nor is His judgment avoided.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:15 their sword shall enter their own heart.</span> The consequences of sin are frequently the result of its outworking. See 7:14–16; 34:21; 35:8.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:21 borrows but does not pay back.</span> The wicked break the eighth commandment, against stealing, by not repaying their debts. The righteous pay their debts and give money generously. Those who give mercifully to God’s cause prosper at last.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:24 fall.</span> The wise man is not perfect—he may fall in the way—but God guides and protects him even when he sins and encounters obstacles (cf. Prov. 24:16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:25, 26</span> Confirming the truth of v. 24, the psalmist draws on the experience of his long life to assure the upright that God will abandon neither them nor their children. The righteous are known by their deeds of mercy and generosity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.30"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:30, 31</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page873" title="873" />Governed inwardly by God’s law, both the speech and the actions of the righteous person are wise and just. In Hebrew, “heart” is the normal way of referring to the inner principle that governs outward performance (Prov. 4:23).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.33"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:33 brought to trial.</span> The Lord will not allow the accusations of the wicked to destroy those He deems righteous. At His bar of justice God will pronounce them innocent.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.35"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:35 green laurel tree.</span> It commonly happens that the wicked prosper in the business of this world (Luke 16:8). They should be mourned, not envied, since their temporary success is but a prelude to eternal loss.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.37.37"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 37:37 future.</span> Or “posterity.” Either the individual’s later life or his children are meant here, but in the ultimate sense this promise speaks of the eternal peace enjoyed in God’s presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 38</span> In this lament the psalmist suffers physically, mentally, and spiritually under the discipline of God (v. 1) as a result of his sin (vv. 2–10) and at the hands of friends and enemies (vv. 11–20), so he turns to the Lord for help (vv. 21, 22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:1 rebuke . . . discipline.</span> The psalmist is aware that his suffering is the discipline of God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:2–10</span> These verses show that the psalmist suffers as a result of his own sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:2 your arrows.</span> God usually fights for the psalmist and against the enemy (Ps. 18:14), but here is a quite different case. The psalmist confesses the sin that has brought God’s anger upon him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:3 because of your indignation . . . because of my sin.</span> These two phrases are parallel and show a dual (divine and human) reason for the psalmist’s illness.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">no health.</span> The psalmist’s sin had serious effects on his health. In some cases sin and guilt are the cause of illness, but sickness is not always the result of sins committed by the person who suffers (book of Job; John 9:1–12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page874" title="874" />wounds.</span> Implies some kind of physical abuse by others. The symptoms cannot all be related to a specific disease or condition. It has been suggested that the symptoms are actually a catalog of distresses experienced over a period of time.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:10 light of my eyes . . . has gone.</span> Ill health can be seen in the eyes; see 13:3.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:11–20</span> These verses show the psalmist suffering at the hands of friends and enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:11 My friends . . . stand aloof.</span> Friends are of no help to the psalmist because they are afraid or repulsed by the intensity of his suffering. Here, as elsewhere in the psalm, we are reminded of Job’s experience (v. 3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:12 lay their snares.</span> While friends stay away, his enemies draw near to hurry his downfall.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:13 deaf man . . . mute.</span> The psalmist is unable to do anything to help himself.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:15 for you . . . I wait.</span> This verse strikes the most positive note of confidence in the psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:16 let them not rejoice over me.</span> He mentions to God the shame he will suffer when the enemy rejoices at the downfall of one of God’s children; see 3:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:21, 22</span> These verses show the psalmist turning to the Lord for help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.38.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 38:21 my God.</span> The psalmist still feels personally related to God in spite of his ordeal.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 39</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page875" title="875" />This lament is more personal and autobiographical than most. The author seems to have been an older, reflective person, like the writer of Ecclesiastes. His anger (vv. 2, 3) is not unlike Job’s. Numerous links between Pss. 38 and 39 invite us to read Ps. 39 as an added perspective on the struggles endured in Ps. 38. There are three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): the inner turmoil of a silent sufferer (vv. 1–3), a despairing reflection on human existence (vv. 4–6), and a prayer (vv. 7–13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:1–3</span> These verses express the inner turmoil of a silent sufferer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:1 not sin with my tongue.</span> The psalmist may have been questioning the prosperity of the wicked and fearing that if he spoke in his anger and frustration, he might say something offensive to God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">muzzle.</span> He desires to speak out and has to force himself to be quiet.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:2 my distress.</span> The psalmist repressed his feelings but could not do away with them. Finally, he spoke.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:4–6</span> These verses are a despairing reflection on human existence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:4 measure of my days.</span> Their short, hard lives tempted the faithful as they compared them to the prosperity of the wicked and questioned God’s wisdom and justice. See note on 88:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:6 for nothing.</span> The same Hebrew word is translated “mere breath” in v. 5. The sentiment is similar to that found in Ecclesiastes 5:8–20.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:7–13</span> These verses are a prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:8 my transgressions.</span> In the context of 38:4, 18, it seems that the psalmist’s sin is at least part of the underlying cause of his suffering.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:10 your stroke.</span> This could be sickness, but it could include depression and other setbacks in life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:12</span> The psalmist has passed from anger to weeping. The strong emotion of the psalm makes its final prayer especially vivid.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.39.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 39:13 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page876" title="876" />smile again, before I depart.</span> There is almost a despairing hope at the end of the psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 40</span> This psalm has two sections: thanksgiving (vv. 1–10) and lamentation (vv. 11–17). God has answered an earlier prayer of the psalmist, but he still has problems to bring before God. He looks to God in a new time of crisis.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:1–10</span> These verses are thanksgiving.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:2 pit of destruction . . . rock.</span> A miry pit is contrasted with the sure footing of a rock. Sheol, the grave, is often pictured as a pit (6:5; 30:3 and notes). Perhaps the psalmist was ill and threatened with death; or, since the psalm is probably royal, he may have felt the threat of death in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:3 new song.</span> See note on 33:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:4 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">proud.</span> A rare word used of Egypt in 87:4 and there simply translated “Rahab.” Here it probably refers to the idols of the surrounding nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:6 you have not delighted.</span> The psalmist knows that the animal sacrifices of the OT were mandated by God. But if they were offered without genuine repentance and faith, God did not want them.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you have given me an open ear.</span> This difficult phrase may be idiomatic. The Hebrew more literally translated is “ears you have dug for me” (text note), which would mean that God gave the psalmist ears to hear and obey. The phrase is important because it is cited in Heb. 10:5–7. Hebrews uses the Septuagint translation, “a body have you prepared for me.” The meaning is the same; the ears are to the body as the part to the whole. The obedience of Jesus in the body is to offer Himself once and for all, replacing the animal sacrifices of the OT.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:7 in the scroll of the book it is written of me.</span> The reference may refer to the commandment recorded for kings in Deut. 17.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:8 I delight to do your will.</span> This verse comes to the heart of the matter. The psalmist offers what God requires—heartfelt obedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:9 great congregation.</span> See 22:25 and 35:18.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:11–17</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page877" title="877" />These verses are lamentation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:12 evils . . . iniquities.</span> The psalmist identifies the source of his troubles as both external (enemies seeking to thwart him; cf. 38:11–20) and internal (his own sin; cf. 38:4, 18; 39:10).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:13–17</span> These verses are nearly identical to Ps. 70.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:13 make haste . . . to help.</span> In his desperate plight, the psalmist boldly asks the Lord to come to his rescue.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:14 be turned back and brought to dishonor.</span> He wants the Lord to turn the tables on the enemy. They seek the psalmist’s ruin and his life; he asks God to ruin them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:16 Great is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See note on 35:27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.40.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 40:17 poor and needy.</span> See note on 9:18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 41</span> The psalm has three strophes (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:1–3</span> These verses give instructions for receiving care.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:1 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">considers the poor.</span> Understands or empathizes with those who are helpless and unable to take care of themselves. The psalmist is in this condition due to his debilitating sickness. Accordingly, the first three verses here may have been spoken to him by another person, perhaps a priest.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">delivers him.</span> Those strong in self-confidence do not turn to the Lord, because they think they have no need for Him. Those not so deluded, realizing their weakness, have nowhere else to turn.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:2 in the land.</span> The Lord preserves the life of His people, but He will also prosper them in the land. This applies the promise of the land found in the Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 12:1–3).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:4–10</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page878" title="878" />These verses are a recounting of a past prayer for healing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:6 he utters empty words.</span> The psalmist’s enemies visited him while he was ill, speaking words of comfort, but afterward spreading malicious lies about him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:9 lifted his heel.</span> For this idiom see Gen. 25:19–26, where the noun “heel” is connected with the verb “to deceive.” The point is that the psalmist’s close friend has betrayed him in his moment of need. He is abandoned by everyone. Jesus applied this verse specifically to Judas Iscariot (John 13:18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:11, 12</span> These verses express confidence in God’s pleasure.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.41.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 41:13</span> A doxology that concludes Book 1 (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes). The doxology in all likelihood is an independent poem.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Blessed be.</span> God is blessed in response to all the blessings he has granted in Pss. 1–41.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 42</span> This psalm and Ps. 43 are actually parts of a single psalm. A number of early Hebrew manuscripts put them together, and a common refrain unites them (42:5, 11; 43:5). Ps. 43 is without a title in a part of the Psalter where almost every psalm is titled. The two psalms are a single lament in three parts, each concluding with the same refrain (42:1–5, 6–11; Ps. 43:5). For some reason the psalmist is forced to be separated from Jerusalem, the place God has chosen to make His throne. His distance from the Lord and the presence of his enemies cause him to cry out to the Lord for help. Ps. 42:1 contains the primary theme of the psalm: longing for God. There are three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): longing expressed as thirst (42:1–5), longing expressed in discouragement (42:6–11), and longing expressed in prayer (43:1–5).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:1–5</span> Longing expressed as thirst.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:1 As a deer pants for flowing streams.</span> A powerful description of deep desire for God’s presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:2 appear before God.</span> Due to Jesus’ redemptive work on the cross, the Christian has ready access to the Lord in prayer. The psalmist suffers because he is separated from the temple, the place God specifically set apart for worship during the period between David and Jesus. The psalmist desires to return to the temple and the assurance of God’s life-giving presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:4 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page879" title="879" />I remember.</span> During this time of depression and separation from God, the psalmist recalls the past when his relationship with God was good and he rejoiced in participating in the worship processions in Jerusalem. The Songs of Ascents (Pss. 120–34) were sung at these celebrations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:5 Why are you cast down, O my soul.</span> This verse occurs twice more as a refrain (v. 11 and 43:5). In dialogue with himself, the psalmist takes fresh hold on God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Hope in God.</span> There is no other source of ultimate hope.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:6–11</span> Longing expressed in discouragement.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:6 I remember you.</span> Ps. 77 is another lament where the remembrance of God’s grace provides a bulwark against depression in the present.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">land of Jordan . . . Hermon . . . Mizar.</span> Hermon is the mountain range at the far north of Israel’s boundaries, near the source of the Jordan River. Mizar is of unknown location.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:7 have gone over me.</span> The overwhelming waters of chaos are a well-known image of despair and trouble in the Bible. Cf. 18:4; 32:6; 46:2, 3; 69:1, 2; 114:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:8 steadfast love.</span> Specifically, God’s lovingkindness toward those in covenant with Him, who acknowledge His rule over them, and to whom He has given promises.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.42.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 42:11 Why are you cast down.</span> See note on 42:5.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Hope in God.</span> There is no other source of ultimate hope. See note on 42:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.43.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 43</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page880" title="880" />See introduction to Ps. 42.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 43:1–5</span> Longing expressed in prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.43.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 43:1 Vindicate me . . . defend my cause.</span> Technical legal terms that give the psalm a judicial setting.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">ungodly.</span> Lit. those who are without covenant lovingkindness. These are nations or people who do not enjoy a covenant relationship with God, who do not honor His laws, and therefore do not share in His covenant promises.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.43.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 43:3 your holy hill.</span> Mount Zion in Jerusalem, where the temple was located. God’s firm mountain is to be contrasted with the turbulent waters of chaos (46:2, 3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.43.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 43:5 Why are you cast down.</span> See note on 42:5.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Hope in God.</span> There is no other source of ultimate hope. See note on 42:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 44</span> In this psalm, an alternation between “I” and “we” suggests that the psalmist is the king of Israel. Psalm 44 is one of the darker laments and can be divided into three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) that move from past to future: past victories through faith in God (vv. 1–8), present defeats in spite of faithfulness to God (vv. 9–22), and future salvation through the unfailing love of God (vv. 23–26).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:1–8</span> Past victories through faith in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:1 deeds you performed in their days.</span> Memory plays a key role in the psalms (Ps. 77). When in distress, it brings healing to remember God’s gracious acts in the past. In this psalm, however, past deliverance throws a question mark over the present. Why doesn’t God work now as He did for our fathers in the past?</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:2 them you planted.</span> The reference is to the conquest and settlement of the land as recorded in the book of Joshua.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:3 your right hand.</span> Israel did not take possession of the land by might or strategy but through God’s power. God fought for them like a warrior in their midst (Deut. 7; Josh. 6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:4 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page881" title="881" />Jacob.</span> Another name for Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:6 nor can my sword save me.</span> Although God’s people use God-given resources, they must not trust in them.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:9–22</span> Present defeats in spite of faithfulness to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:9 rejected us . . . disgraced us.</span> God was with Israel at Jericho, but now He does not bless the army with His leadership. This resulted in their easy defeat.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:12 sold your people for a trifle.</span> These bold words form a striking example of the honesty of the psalmist’s approach to God in prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:17 we have not been false to your covenant.</span> Unlike the troubles in Pss. 38 and 39, those in this psalm are not owing to sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:19 shadow of death.</span> Normally reserved for God’s enemies (Nah. 1:8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:22 for your sake.</span> The world seems utterly turned around. The people have not forgotten God, yet they suffer for His sake. Paul quotes this verse in Rom. 8:36.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:23–26</span> Future salvation through the unfailing love of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:23 Awake.</span> The psalmist prays as if God were asleep and unaware of Israel’s plight. This daring language reflects the writer’s frustration. The usual cry to God before battle is “Arise” (7:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:24 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page882" title="882" />hide your face.</span> An image for the absence of God’s favor (see 13:1; 27:9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:25 our soul is bowed down.</span> For the same idea in different language, see 42:5, 11; 43:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.44.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 44:26 for the sake of your steadfast love.</span> Specifically, God’s lovingkindness to those with whom He is in covenantal relationship (e.g., Abraham, Gen. 17:1–9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 45</span> As the title indicates, Ps. 45 is a wedding song. There are no other wedding song examples in the Psalter. The closest parallels are the love poems found in the Song of Solomon. This song is appropriate for a royal wedding and was probably used in many royal weddings throughout the history of Israel. The psalm has four strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): the introduction (v. 1), the praise of the king (vv. 2–9), the calling of the queen (vv. 10–15), and the conclusion (vv. 16, 17). Since the Davidic kingship reflects God’s ultimate kingship and anticipates Christ as king, the psalm has a second application to Christ, the king and bridegroom, and His bride, the church (Eph. 5:25–32). Ps. 45 is applied to Jesus Christ in Heb. 1:8, 9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:1</span> The poet’s introduction to the wedding song.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:1 pleasing theme . . . the king.</span> The poet is pleased with the privilege of composing a love song for the king’s wedding.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">tongue.</span> This word could mean that this psalm and others were composed orally and written down later.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:2–9</span> These verses praise the king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:2 most handsome.</span> The poet takes the bride’s part in extolling the beauty of her husband.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">blessed you forever.</span> Reflects the promises of the Davidic covenant in 2 Sam. 7. David would have a descendant on the throne forever, a promise fulfilled in Jesus Christ, who as the Son of David rules from heaven as king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:3 splendor and majesty.</span> See note on 8:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:4 your right hand.</span> The Davidic king was the head of the military forces of Israel, ordained by God to fight for the people. In this role the king reflects God’s glory, since the Lord fought on behalf of Israel. Likewise, Jesus Christ leads the church against demonic forces (Eph. 6:10–20) and will return again to destroy all evil (Rev. 19:11–16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:6 O God.</span> A clear identification of the divine king, that is, Christ.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:7 anointed you.</span> Davidic kings were anointed at their inauguration (1 Sam. 16:13), which prefigured Christ as the anointed king of glory.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:8 myrrh and aloes and cassia.</span> A description of the king on his wedding day.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:10–15</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page883" title="883" />These verses call the queen to the wedding.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:10 forget your people.</span> Just as the bride is exhorted to leave her former family, so the Christian forsakes all to be joined to Christ (Gen. 2:24; Matt. 10:37, 38).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:16, 17</span> These verses are the poet’s conclusion to the wedding song.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:16 your sons.</span> Though the queen leaves family behind, she gains a new and exalted family in the future.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.45.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 45:17 I will cause your name to be remembered . . . praise you.</span> An enduring good reputation was a blessing in the ancient world and was promised to the queen. Her name would be remembered through her sons. Similarly, Mary was praised because of her son (Luke 1:42).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 46</span> This psalm has some affinities with Pss. 48; 76; 84; 87, which are called “Zion Songs.” Though Zion is not specifically mentioned, it is alluded to in vv. 4, 5. The theme of the psalm is confidence in God in the face of monumental troubles, and the psalm moves from cosmic collapse (vv. 1–3) to political turmoil (vv. 4–7), to divine intervention (vv. 8–11). Martin Luther was moved by this psalm to write the famous hymn “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God.”</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:1–3</span> Teaches God’s people not to fear, even if the world collapses.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:2 mountains . . . sea.</span> A violent earthquake is described; there may be ancient Near Eastern portrayals of cosmic violence employed here. God overcomes the sea to accomplish His purposes (cf. 18; 74; 77; Nah. 1).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:4–7</span> These verses shift the focus from cosmic collapse to political turmoil.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:4 river.</span> Jerusalem has no literal river. There was a river in Eden (Gen. 2:10), and there will be a “river . . . of life” in the New Jerusalem (Rev. 22:1, 2). The “river” in Ps. 46:4 is explained in v. 5: “God is in the midst of her.” Similarly, John 7:38, 39 connects the “rivers of living water” with the Spirit of God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">holy habitation.</span> As the Israelites looked to the temple, they felt secure in the symbol of God’s protection. Later in their history the people regarded the temple as a kind of idol that would save them from the Babylonians (Jer. 7). In this psalm, however, their trust is faithful and obedient, prefiguring the security enjoyed by God’s people in the eternal city that is to come (Rev. 22:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:5 she shall not be moved.</span> Ancient Jerusalem indeed fell to the Babylonians in 586 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> The New Jerusalem will stand “forever and ever” (Rev. 22:5).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">when morning dawns.</span> In ancient military campaigns, fighting commenced at first light. God’s help will not be slow.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:6 earth melts.</span> At the voice of God the tumult of the rebellious is stilled forever.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:7 with us.</span> The refrain (again in v. 11) reflects the consolation of God’s people enjoying His protection.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:8–11</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page884" title="884" />A call to rest in and hope for divine intervention.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.46.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 46:10 Be still.</span> In the true knowledge of God and His deliverance there is peace, in contrast with the troubled “nations” (v. 6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 47</span> Along with Pss. 93; 95–99, this psalm can be classified as a kingship psalm. The image of God’s enthronement is at the heart of the psalm. The occasion is a great military victory, and God is king not only of Israel but also of the universe. The psalm has two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): praise for the king who has conquered (vv. 1–5) and praise for the king who has begun to reign (vv. 6–9). This prayer also properly celebrates the ascension and rule of Jesus Christ. Jesus is both king and warrior (Luke 19:38; 23:38; John 1:49).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:1–5</span> These verses offer praise for the king who has conquered.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:1 all peoples.</span> Since God is king of all the earth, not just of Israel, all the nations are called to join in the praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:2 great king over all the earth.</span> The lack in the Hebrew text of a definite article preceding “great king” does not indicate that God is “a” great king among other great kings. The point is that God is <span class="italic">the</span> “great king” (see 48:2), the absolute suzerain over all the earth (v. 7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:3 He subdued peoples.</span> God won innumerable victories for His people throughout their history, beginning with the great victory at the Red Sea (Ex. 15). Here the particular reference is to the conquest of Canaan in the days of Joshua.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:4 our heritage.</span> This refers to the conquest and allotment of the Promised Land. Deut. 7:1–11 explains that it is only through God’s grace that Israel possessed the land.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:5 gone up.</span> An enthronement. God has been king from all eternity (93:2), but after the victory His kingship is celebrated anew.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:6–9</span> These verses offer praise for the king who has begun to reign.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.47.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 47:9 princes.</span> Leaders gathered in Ps. 2 to rebel against the great King. Now they gather to worship Him.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shields of the earth.</span> Shield is a metaphor for king. The shields of the earth are the kings of the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 48</span> Ps. 48 is similar to Ps. 46, and it may also be compared with Pss. 76; 84; 87; 122. Ps. 48 continues the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page885" title="885" />theme of God’s reign, found in Pss. 46; 47, and praises God by praising the city from which He rules over the whole earth, Mount Zion. The true Mount Zion is a heavenly reality that is experienced in the earthly assembly of the saints (Gal. 4:26; Heb. 12:18–28).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:1–3</span> Focuses on the city of the great King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:1 Great is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span>. See note on 35:27.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">holy mountain.</span> Mount Zion, the location of the temple in Jerusalem. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter14.xhtml#page630">The Incomprehensibility of God</a>” on p. 630.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:2 joy of all the earth.</span> Although the nations did not acknowledge Him, God remained king of the universe, not only of Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">far north.</span> Lit. “beyond Zaphon.” This is not a reference to Jerusalem but to a mountain often described in Canaanite texts as the dwelling place of their gods (Is. 14:13 and notes). The Lord is described with terms used by the neighboring religions to show that all praise really belongs to Him. The true “Zaphon” is “Zion.”</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:4–7</span> Looks at the city through the eyes of fear.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:4 kings assembled.</span> The language is similar to 2:1–3. See 47:9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:5 panic.</span> Their fear is due to God’s power, which He exercised in Jerusalem because He had chosen that city as His dwelling place.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:7 east wind.</span> A hot, dry wind from the desert, commonly used as an image of divine judgment (see Is. 27:8; Jer. 18:17; Ezek. 17:10; Hos. 13:15).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">ships of Tarshish.</span> Seagoing merchant ships (see Jon. 1:3).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:8–11</span> Looks at the city through the eyes of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:8</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">of hosts.</span> A military title identifying God as the one who leads His heavenly army into battle for the protection of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:9 steadfast love.</span> Specifically, God’s love for those in covenant relationship with Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:12–14</span> Identifies the city with the great King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.48.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 48:14 this is God.</span> The city is identified with God. To see the city is to see God, as to look on the heavens is to look on God’s glory (19:1).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">He will guide.</span> Israel’s fate is not a matter of chance or human striving. God is in control, and His sovereignty is not limited by death.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 49</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page886" title="886" />This psalm is in the wisdom tradition (vv. 3, 4), treating issues typical of the Wisdom Books, with numerous connections to Ecclesiastes in particular. The theme of the poem is how to live in the light of an inevitable death, especially in light of the prosperity of the rich. The psalm has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a call to listen to the teaching (vv. 1–4), a warning that wealth cannot redeem (vv. 5–12), and a promise that God will redeem (vv. 13–20). The psalm is one of the most difficult to translate and interpret correctly. Few places in the OT express so directly the hope for the resurrection of the dead. However, the full doctrine of the resurrection was not revealed until Jesus rose from the grave and ascended to the right hand of God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 49:1–4</span> Issues the typical call of wisdom to listen to the teaching.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:1 all peoples.</span> The psalm applies not only to people in redemptive relationship with God but to all people everywhere.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:2 low and high, rich and poor.</span> Merisms (contrasting pairs that express the totality of something) that convey the meaning “everyone.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:3 speak wisdom.</span> The psalm will provide practical insight on the problem at hand. The psalmist identifies himself with the sages of Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:4 proverb . . . riddle.</span> Locates the psalm in the wisdom tradition (see Prov. 1:6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:5–12</span> Warns that wealth cannot redeem from death.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:5 times of trouble.</span> The days approaching one’s death (cf. Eccl. 12:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:6 trust in their wealth.</span> Rather than trusting God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:7 no man can ransom another.</span> No amount of money can prevent death, and no one can escape his or her obligation to die.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:10 wise . . . fool.</span> The thought is reminiscent of Eccl. 2:12–16. The psalmist classifies the rich oppressor with the fools and the senseless.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:11 their dwelling places to all generations.</span> The rich spend much of their lifetime building earthly homes and amassing wealth. But all these things soon pass away.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:12 like the beasts that perish.</span> In comparing this experience of both humans and animals, the psalmist parallels the thought of Eccl. 3:18–21.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:13–20</span> Promises that God will redeem from death.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:14 Like sheep.</span> Unaware, the self-trusting rich are on the road to slaughter.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:15 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page887" title="887" />God will ransom my soul from . . . Sheol.</span> While God does not accept a ransom for death (v. 7), He provides one for the psalmist. The key to this OT awareness of redemption from death is recognition of the eternity of God and of His eternal relationship with His people: “he will receive me.” See Mark 12:26, 27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.49.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 49:17 he will carry nothing away.</span> Verses 16–19 teach that the wicked rich cannot carry their wealth into the dark, joyless eternity to which they are appointed.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 50</span> This psalm has a prophetic cast since a large part of it is composed of two oracles of the Lord, one spoken to the righteous and the other against the wicked. The psalm places special focus on the need to give thanks (vv. 14, 15, 22, 23), as it calls the covenant people to renew their relationship with the Lord (vv. 1–6) by returning to grateful worship (vv. 7–15) and true obedience (vv. 16–23). With regard to the title, see Introduction: Author.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 50:1–6</span> These verses call the covenant people to renew their relationship with the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:1 The Mighty One, God the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalm opens impressively with three divine names. The third is God’s covenant name, conventionally translated with the word “<span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” in small capital letters. In Hebrew it is four consonants, called the “Tetragrammaton,” and pronounced “Yahweh” by contemporary scholars, though that pronunciation is not certain. See Ex. 3:13–15 and notes.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">rising of the sun to its setting.</span> From east to west, God addresses the whole earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:2 Zion.</span> The location of the temple, the place God has chosen to make His presence known. See 2:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shines forth.</span> The language indicates a theophany, a visual self-revelation of God. God’s presence is manifest at His temple in Jerusalem. See Deut. 33:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:3 devouring fire.</span> God’s theophany (v. 2 note) is often accompanied by powerful and dangerous forces, especially when He speaks in judgment (Ex. 19; Is. 24; Nah. 1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:5 covenant with me by sacrifice.</span> A covenant is a solemn agreement between persons. Here, as in most places, it signifies the bond between God and His people. However, since man is sinful, this relationship must be accompanied by sacrifice, representing the punishment for sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:6 heavens.</span> Possibly a poetic way of referring to the inhabitants of heaven, the angels; otherwise, the glory of the inanimate, created heavens.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:7–15</span> These verses call the covenant people to grateful worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:7 testify.</span> This legal terminology is used because covenants were legal instruments that were similar to contracts or treaties. When there was some disruption in the people’s faithfulness, they were often put on trial by the Lord or one of His prophets (Mic. 6:1–8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:8 Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you.</span> Indicates that the people’s problem was not observance of the sacrificial rites. They were faithful to do them, but they apparently misunderstood their significance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:9 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page888" title="888" />will not accept.</span> The people of the surrounding nations thought that their gods ate the sacrifices offered to them and grew hungry when deprived. In the <span class="italic">Gilgamesh Epic</span>, the goddess Ishtar bemoans the lack of sacrifices that resulted in her god-sized hunger.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:10 every beast of the forest.</span> God affirms that He created and owns all the creatures of the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:13, 14 Do I eat the flesh of bulls.</span> This rhetorical question makes clear that the Lord neither eats the sacrifices, nor is He satisfied with them apart from sincere commitment and thanksgiving.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:16–23</span> These verses call the covenant people to true obedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:16 wicked.</span> The wicked people within the professing covenant community, since they know God’s law.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">recite.</span> May be a reference to a covenant renewal ceremony in which the covenant community together recites the law and reaffirms its intention to keep it (Deut. 31:9–11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:17 hate discipline.</span> A sure sign of a fool (Prov. 1:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:18, 19</span> The psalmist cites the seventh, eighth, and ninth commandments.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:21 I have been silent.</span> God’s silence is frequently taken by the wicked as a sign that He doesn’t care if they sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.50.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 50:22 lest I tear you apart.</span> God insists on obedience from the wicked hypocrites, or they will meet a fearful end.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 51</span> A uniquely powerful statement of the depths of sin and the heights of repentance. It is the most striking of the “prayers of penitence” (introduction to Ps. 6), a type of lament. This psalm exposes the need that results from moral failures. Everyone has two needs: reconciliation (vv. 1–9) and transformation (vv. 10–19).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:1–9</span> These verse show the need for reconciliation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:1 according to your steadfast love.</span> David was guilty of a great sin in the matter of Uriah and Bathsheba (2 Sam. 11). David pleads for God’s mercy, in keeping with His promised love for His people.</p>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page889" title="889" />
      <aside>
        <p epub:type="bridgehead">HUMAN DEPRAVITY</p>
        <p class="noind">A common point of debate among theologians focuses on the question, are human beings basically good or basically evil? The hinge upon which the argument turns is the word <span class="italic">basically.</span> It is a virtual universal consensus that nobody is perfect. We accept the maxim “To err is human.”</p>
        <p>The Bible says that “all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God” (Romans 3:23). Despite this verdict on human shortcomings, the idea persists in our humanistically dominated culture that sin is something peripheral or tangential to our nature. Indeed, we are flawed by sin. Our moral records exhibit blemishes. But somehow we think that our evil deeds reside at the rim or edge of our character and never penetrate to the core. Basically, it is assumed, people are inherently good. But if we lift our gaze to the ultimate standard of goodness—the holy character of God—we realize that what appears to be a basic goodness on an earthly level is corrupt to the core.</p>
        <p>The Bible teaches the total depravity of the human race. Total depravity means radical corruption. We must be careful to note the difference between <span class="italic">total</span> depravity and <span class="italic">utter</span> depravity. To be utterly depraved is to be as wicked as one could possibly be. Hitler was extremely depraved, but he could have been worse than he was. I am a sinner. Yet I could sin more often and more severely than I actually do. I am not utterly depraved, but I am totally depraved. For total depravity means that I and everyone else are depraved or corrupt in the totality of our being. There is no part of us that is left untouched by sin. Our minds, our wills, and our bodies are affected by evil. We speak sinful words, do sinful deeds, have impure thoughts. Our very bodies suffer from the ravages of sin.</p>
        <p>Perhaps <span class="italic">radical corruption</span> is a better term to describe our fallen condition than “total depravity.” I am using the word <span class="italic">radical</span> not so much to mean “extreme,” but to lean more heavily on its original meaning. <span class="italic">Radical</span> comes from the Latin word for “root” or “core.” Our problem with sin is that it is rooted in the core of our being. It permeates our hearts. It is because sin is at our core and not merely at the exterior of our lives that the Bible says:</p>
        <p>None is righteous, no, not one; no one understands; no one seeks for God. All have turned aside; together they have become worthless; no one does good, not even one. (Romans 3:10–12)</p>
        <p>It is because of this condition that the verdict of Scripture is heard: we are “dead in . . . trespasses and sins” (Ephesians 2:1); we are “sold under sin” (Romans 7:14); we are “captive to the law of sin” (Romans 7:23) and are “by nature children of wrath” (Ephesians 2:3). Only by the quickening power of the Holy Spirit may we be brought out of this state of spiritual death. It is God who makes us alive as we become His craftsmanship (Ephesians 2:1–10).</p>
      </aside>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">mercy.</span> God’s forgiveness of sinners is the result of His mercy. Sinners deserve death, but He gives life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:2 Wash.</span> The word means specifically to wash clothes. The psalmist’s iniquity is like filthy clothes that need to be laundered.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:4 you only.</span> David committed adultery with Bathsheba and sent her husband to his death. How can he say he sinned against God only? This is an example of hyperbole (16:2 note), the point being that David’s sin was ultimately, not exclusively, against God. Rebellion against God was the root of his sin, and his crime injured people who belonged to God and transgressed a social order created by God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">justified . . . blameless.</span> David recognized that God’s anger against him was just. This verse is cited by Paul in Rom. 3:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:5 brought forth in iniquity.</span> The Bible clearly teaches that children are sinners. They are not born innocent and only later become sinners. Children, too, need God’s salvation. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page889">Human Depravity</a>.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:6 inward being . . . the secret heart.</span> Truth and wisdom at the center of one’s being.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:7 with hyssop.</span> The allusion is to Lev. 14:6, 7, where the cleansing of a leper is described.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">wash me.</span> This may be an allusion to Num. 19:19, where instructions are given for ritual washing after contact with a dead person. On the need for <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page890" title="890" />washing the heart, see theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter41.xhtml#page1713">Legalism</a>” on p. 1713.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:10–19</span> These verse show the need for transformation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:10 Create.</span> The verb is the same one used at Gen. 1:1 for the creation of the world, a verb that focuses on the newness of the thing created. The psalmist knows that the redirection of his desires and thoughts can come about only through the intervention of God. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter45.xhtml#page1964">Repentance</a>” on p. 1964.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:11 Holy Spirit.</span> The OT does not make a full disclosure of the personhood of the Holy Spirit. David understands that his spiritual well-being depends on God’s presence with him. He fears that the Spirit of anointing for kingship may be taken away from him, as the Spirit was taken from Saul (1 Sam. 16:14). See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter44.xhtml#page1889">The Personality of the Holy Spirit</a>” on p. 1889.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:12 joy of your salvation.</span> David suffered from a spiritual dullness that led to moral bankruptcy. To prevent such disaster in the future, he prays for joy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:13 teach transgressors your ways.</span> If forgiven, David promises to use his life to help others find forgiveness (see Ps. 32).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:14 sing aloud of your righteousness.</span> David has already spoken of God’s justice in condemning sin (v. 4). Now, the same justice overcomes sin and condemnation through grace, as explained in Rom. 3:21–26 and epitomized in 1 John 1:9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:16 you will not be pleased with a burnt offering.</span> See 50:9. The Bible values heartfelt obedience above outward religious conformity (40:6–8; Mic. 6:6–8). As v. 19 shows, this does not condemn sacrifices as such.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.51.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 51:18, 19</span> The restoration of the king leads to blessing for the people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 52</span> This psalm, like Ps. 49, is an instructional poem that expresses confidence in the Lord, like a psalm of trust; pronounces judgment on the wicked, like a lament; and uses wisdom language. The psalm focuses on the question of personal security: will it be found in oneself (vv. 1–7) or in God (vv. 8, 9)?</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:title</span> The historical title refers to the event recorded in 1 Sam. 22:6–23. In effect, the title identifies Doeg with the boastful, wicked man and David with the righteous psalmist. However, the psalm itself is not so specific and continues to be immediately relevant to the people of God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:1–7</span> These verses ask about the wisdom of finding security in self.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:1 boast of evil.</span> As if evil deeds will provide all that one needs.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">mighty man.</span> A soldier or warrior.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:4 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page891" title="891" />devour.</span> More exactly, “confused.” The Wisdom Literature consistently teaches that confusion is on the side of the wicked and order on the side of righteousness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:6 fear.</span> This verb may seem strange as associated with laughter. The meaning, however, is not fear in the sense of dread but rather in the sense of reverence and awe. The righteous see the justice of God’s judgment against the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:7 would not make God his refuge.</span> This man is the opposite of everything the psalms stand for. Throughout the psalms people are urged to find their security in God, not themselves. God is the power behind His people in all their victories.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">trusted in . . . riches . . . sought refuge in his own destruction.</span> Relied on self for security.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:8, 9</span> These verses encourage the wisdom of finding security in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:8 olive tree.</span> Reminiscent of Pss. 1; 92. Olive trees can live for hundreds of years.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I trust in the steadfast love of God.</span> The psalmist found security in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.52.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 52:9 you have done it.</span> The psalmist acknowledges that God, not self, is the source of security.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">in the presence of the godly.</span> The assurance of the psalmist leads to praise in public worship. See note on 22:22.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.53.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 53</span> Cf. Ps. 14. A meditation on the wickedness of the fool. God will destroy the fool and restore Israel’s fortunes. Ps. 53, in contrast to Ps. 14, uses “God” rather than the more specific, covenant name “<span class="smcaps">Lord</span>” (Yahweh) to refer to the deity. This variation fits the broader context, since Ps. 53 is in Book 2 of the Psalter, which uses the broader term rather than the covenant name.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 53:1–4</span> See notes on 14:1–4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.53.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 53:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page892" title="892" />scatters the bones.</span> In the OT, God often fights for His people against their flesh-and-blood enemies. With NT revelation the underlying spiritual conflict to save His people from sin becomes the dominant theme, although the fundamental conflict has been at the spiritual level from the beginning (Gen. 3:4, 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.53.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 53:6 salvation for Israel.</span> An expression of hope for deliverance from evil.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 54</span> The psalm is prayer and praise for the power of God, which sustains and delivers from opposition, and has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a prayer for vindication (vv. 1–3), an affirmation of faith (v. 4), and praise for deliverance (vv. 5–7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:title</span> The historical title locates the inspiration of the psalm in David’s pre-monarchical days. He wrote the psalm after being betrayed by the Ziphites (1 Sam. 23:19; 26:1).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:1–3</span> These verses are a prayer for vindication.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:1 vindicate me.</span> Identifies his complaint as a judicial one. David had been unjustly betrayed by the Ziphites, his countrymen from Judah.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:3 strangers.</span> Though they are countrymen, he does not know them personally.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:4</span> This verse is an affirmation of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:4 God is my helper.</span> See 33:20; 44:26; 124:8. John Calvin routinely used 124:8 at the beginning of worship.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:5–7</span> These verses offer praise for deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.54.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 54:6 sacrifice . . . give thanks.</span> A sacrifice of thanksgiving and a thanksgiving psalm were customary responses to God’s deliverance of His people. See 22:22 and note.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 55</span> Like many laments, this psalm bemoans the attack of enemies. Most unusual is the sorrow over betrayal by a friend. The psalm descends to the pits of despair but turns at the end toward the Lord with hope. The macrostructure of this psalm is not clear, so it is best to read it in a series of small units. The psalm anticipates the suffering of Christ, who was betrayed by Judas, a disciple of His inner circle (Matt. 26:47–56).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:1–5</span> An opening cry for help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:3 enemy.</span> The psalmist refers to enemies in general terms because he knows that his song will be used by other people in other situations (v. 22).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:6–8</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page893" title="893" />Expresses the psalmist’s urge to flee.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:6 I would fly away.</span> The writer has the urge to escape the source of his distress but is unable to do so.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:9–11</span> Bemoans the reign of violence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:9 divide their tongues.</span> The psalmist alludes to the judgment the Lord brought upon the wicked generation who built the tower of Babel (Gen. 11:1–9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:10 go around it on its walls.</span> Lawless men are loose and active on the walls, the main defense of the city.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:11 its marketplace.</span> This description of an ancient city of Israel, presumably Jerusalem during David’s reign, could be applied to today’s lawless cities.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:12–14</span> Bemoans betrayal by a friend.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:13</span> The terms become increasingly intimate, from “a man, my equal” to “my companion” to the climax, “my familiar friend.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:14 sweet counsel together.</span> The worst hurt of all is that the close friend was a fellow worshiper in the house of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:15</span> A prayer for justice.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:16–19</span> A statement of confidence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:15 down to Sheol alive.</span> That is, into Sheol, the grave.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:18 battle.</span> While the psalm conceivably had its origin in battle, it is more likely that the battle is a metaphor for the struggles that the psalmist feels with his enemies and friends who surround him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:19 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page894" title="894" />enthroned from of old.</span> God hears the psalmist’s prayers from His kingly throne in heaven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:20 his covenant.</span> The psalmist describes the willful breaking of a formal agreement between friends. A covenant is a solemn agreement under sanctions.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:21 smooth as butter . . . softer than oil.</span> A powerful, poetic description of hypocrisy and deceit.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:22, 23</span> Shows the psalmist’s ultimate recourse.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:22 never permit the righteous to be moved.</span> See 121:3. The context of the psalm shows that there is no unqualified promise that the righteous will always be happy and prosperous. The psalmist sings this lament to the Lord because he is in despair. The verse must mean that God will not leave the righteous in the fallen position forever but will vindicate them in the end.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.55.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 55:23 the pit of destruction.</span> The grave.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I will trust in you.</span> Such an affirmation is typical at the end of a lament; see 13:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 56</span> The psalm has characteristics of both the lament and the psalm of confidence. The psalmist expresses fear and faith, but faith prevails in the end.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:title</span> The title is difficult to fit into David’s life as it is known from the Historical Books. The closest parallel is 1 Sam. 21:10–15, when David was feigning madness before the king of Gath in order to escape him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:1, 2</span> A prayer for mercy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:1 Be gracious.</span> A common prayer in the laments (see 4:1; 6:2; 31:9; 41:4, 10), sometimes translated, “have mercy” or “be merciful” (51:1; 57:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:2 trample.</span> The enemies, like ruthless animals, treat the psalmist as their prey.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:3, 4</span> Moves from fear and faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:3 When I am afraid.</span> Experiencing fear from time to time is not unusual for God’s people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I put my trust in you.</span> Faith must be exercised in times of fear.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:4 I shall not be afraid.</span> The resolve to trust prevails over fear.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:5, 6</span> Describes the psalmist’s trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:5 injure my cause.</span> They change the meanings of his words (text note) to put him in a bad light.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:7–9</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page895" title="895" />Moves from need to confidence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:7 cast down the peoples.</span> The parallelism of this verse suggests that the enemies are the foreign nations that surround Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:8 kept count.</span> The psalmist is calling upon God to hear and remember his prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:9 This I know.</span> The psalmist remembers God’s covenant promises, such as Deut. 28:7, a promise that God will scatter the enemies of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:10, 11</span> These verses, like vv. 3, 4, move from fear to faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:12, 13</span> A vow to give thanks once the psalmist is delivered.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.56.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 56:12 render thank offerings.</span> When the psalmist’s prayer is answered, he promises to return to offer his thanks. He would do this by offering sacrifices and singing thanksgiving songs similar to Ps. 34. See 22:22 and note.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 57</span> Like Ps. 56, Ps. 57 expresses both lamentation and confidence, with confidence being the final note. The refrain in vv. 5, 11 divides the psalm into two stanzas and gives the ultimate perspective of confidence prevailing over adversity. There are four concentrically arranged strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): God’s steadfast love and faithfulness (vv. 1–3), confidence (vv. 4, 5), confidence (v. 6), and God’s steadfast love and faithfulness (vv. 7–11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:title</span> The psalm was composed before David was king, when he was hiding from Saul in a cave. Many scholars relate the psalm to 1 Sam. 24, but a closer parallel is 1 Sam. 22:1–5, when David fled to the cave of Adullam.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:1–3</span> These verse express trust in God’s steadfast love and faithfulness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:1 Be merciful.</span> See note on 56:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shadow of your wings.</span> The image of God as a mother bird protecting her young from trouble communicates God’s compassion for His people (see Ruth 2:12). See note on maternal representations of God at 131:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:2 fulfills his purpose for me.</span> See 138:8.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:3 steadfast love . . . faithfulness.</span> The word translated “steadfast love” indicates God’s devotion in binding Himself to His people by His covenant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:4, 5</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page896" title="896" />Expresses confidence in the face of opposition.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:4 lions.</span> Lions were numerous in the ancient Near East and in Palestine. They often symbolized power and ruthlessness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:5 above the heavens.</span> God is so great that not even the heavens can hold Him (1 Kin. 8:27). He is transcendent, but in His compassion He dwells with men.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:6</span> Expresses confidence in the face of opposition.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:6 net . . . pit.</span> Like a hunter, the enemy sets snares for the psalmist. The principle that evil people are ultimately caught by their wicked schemes is a theme that runs through the Psalms and the Prophets. See 7:14–16; 34:21; 35:8; 37:15.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">fallen into it themselves.</span> One reaps what one sows (Gal. 6:7; cf. 2 Cor. 9:6; Hos. 8:7; 10:12).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:7–11</span> These verses express praise for God’s steadfast love and faithfulness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:7 steadfast.</span> Nothing can swerve the psalmist from his faithful intention to offer up his hymn of praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:8 awake the dawn.</span> He will praise the Lord through the night, until dawn arises.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:9 among the peoples.</span> God is more than the God of Israel. He is king of the universe, and the psalmist will praise God’s great deeds throughout creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:10 steadfast love . . . faithfulness.</span> See v. 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.57.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 57:11 above the heavens.</span> See v. 5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 58</span> Psalms of lament often contain curses directed against the evil and unjust. The objects of the psalmist’s scorn seem to be human rulers (v. 1 note), especially unjust judges. The psalm has two stanzas; the first (vv. 1–5) addresses the problem of injustice, while the second (vv. 6–11) points to a resolution. Early Christian tradition associated this psalm with the high priest and the Sanhedrin as they condemned Jesus (Matt. 26:57–68).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:1–5</span> These verses articulate the problem of injustice in the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:1 gods.</span> The word “gods” could be used for the corrupt judges of this verse, according to the example in 82:1 (text note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:3 from the womb.</span> David recognized this of himself in 51:5. All are born with a nature that rebels against God—the doctrine of original sin. David means that the wickedness of the evil judges in particular extends back to the beginning of their lives.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:4, 5 venom of a serpent.</span> The psalmist likens the wicked rulers to snakes. The story of the fall (Gen. 3), initiated by the Serpent, sharpens the image. The rulers’ words are as distinctive as the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page897" title="897" />venom of the serpent, and they turn a deaf ear to logical arguments and even divine judgments that may be addressed to them.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:6–11</span> These verses point toward a solution to the problem of injustice.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:7 when he aims his arrows . . . blunted.</span> Bring to nothing their evil schemes that seek violence against the innocent.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:10 righteous will rejoice.</span> Eternity will show that God’s judgment of the wicked is just. This judgment will cause rejoicing since the alternative would be unthinkable: heaven populated with God’s enemies (Rev. 16:5, 6; 19:1–3; 21:27).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.58.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 58:11 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page898" title="898" />a reward.</span> When the wicked prosper or the righteous suffer, faith is shaken. The covenant promises of Deut. 28 provide for curses on the wicked and blessings for the righteous. The last judgment will set things right again.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 59</span> The psalm is a lament and is symmetrically arranged in two stanzas with three matching strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): petition with reasons (vv. 1–5), the enemy as dogs (vv. 6, 7), a statement of assurance (vv. 8–10), petition with reasons (vv. 11–13), the enemy as dogs (vv. 14, 15), and statement of assurance (vv. 16, 17). The quasi refrain that marks the end of each stanza provides the theme of the psalm: “O my Strength . . . my fortress” (vv. 9, 17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:title</span> The psalm comes from the period before David became king. Saul set a watch over David’s house, hoping to kill him; but David’s wife Michal, the daughter of Saul, helped David escape (1 Sam. 19:11–17).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:1–5</span> These verses offer a petition with reasons.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:3 For no transgression or sin of mine.</span> The psalmist is not saying that he is without sin; he is asserting that the enemy has no cause against him. This was true of the original situation, where David had committed no aggression against Saul’s kingship. See Ps. 26.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:5 God of hosts.</span> This divine title indicates that God has heavenly armies at His command.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">nations . . . plot evil.</span> The enemies come from the nations outside of Israel but also from within.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:6, 7</span> These verses portray the enemy as dogs.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:6 like dogs.</span> The enemies are like a pack of dogs who roam the streets of the city and make them unsafe. Dogs were not valued in the ancient Near East.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:7 Who . . . will hear us.</span> See 64:5 and note.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:8–10</span> These verses are a statement of assurance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:10 God . . . will meet me.</span> God will lead the way in the fight against the enemy. In the time of Joshua, the ark, symbolic of God’s presence, led Israel into the Promised Land.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">look in triumph.</span> For now, the enemy gloats over the psalmist, but the psalmist expects a reversal.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:11–13</span> These verses offer a petition with reasons.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:11 Kill them not.</span> The psalmist desires to prolong the suffering of the enemy. This will make them an example to the rest of Israel that evil doesn’t pay.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:12 sin of their mouths.</span> Words are powerful and can bring either great blessing or tremendous harm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:13 that they may know.</span> The ultimate goal of the destruction of the enemy is that the glory of God’s justice may be seen.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:14–15</span> These verses portray the enemy as dogs; see v. 6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.59.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 59:16, 17</span> These verses are a statement of assurance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 60</span> The psalm laments a military defeat and asks God why He has rejected the people. For the most part, the community voice dominates, and the psalm addresses God with the first-person plural.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:title</span> This psalm has the longest title in the Psalter, referring to the events recorded in 2 Sam. 8 and 1 Chr. 18. The Historical Books, however, tell only of the conclusion of the battle’s victory. The title and the psalm suggest that David experienced <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page899" title="899" />setbacks on the way to victory. The Historical Books and the psalm differ on the number of Edomites killed in the Valley of Salt, probably through a copyist’s error. The psalm associates Joab with the victory, while 2 Sam. 8:13 names David, and 1 Chr. 18:12 lists Abishai. All three were high commanders in the army and could be credited with the victory.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:1–5</span> States the problem faced by the psalmist and his request.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:1 rejected us.</span> When God rejects His people, He abandons them and leaves them to the mercy of the enemy. It is only with God’s approval that the people of Israel have any reason for confidence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:3 wine to drink . . . stagger.</span> A frequent image in the Prophets. The cup that makes a nation stagger is the cup of judgment (Jer. 25:15–38; Nah. 3:11). Jesus drank the cup of wrath to its dregs in behalf of His people (Matt. 26:39 and par.).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:4 those who fear you.</span> The verse is a token of hope for the faithful. God gives protection to His people from the weapons of the enemy.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:6–8</span> Contains a reminder of God’s promises.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:6 God has spoken in his holiness.</span> The divine oracle was probably spoken through a prophet associated with the temple (text note). The gist of his message is that victory will be forthcoming, a message borne out by the report in 2 Sam. 8.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I will divide.</span> The following verses exult in the inheritance of the Promised Land.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Shechem . . . Succoth.</span> These names are the first two places that Jacob occupied after returning from his encounter with Esau (Gen. 33:17–20). They are on opposite sides of the Jordan River.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:7 Gilead . . . Manasseh.</span> Both areas are located, at least in part, in the region of the Transjordan.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Ephraim . . . Judah.</span> The two most powerful tribes in Israel. They were frequently rivals, but here they are united as parts of God’s army.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:8 Moab . . . Edom . . . Philistia.</span> Moab and Edom were east of Judah, and Philistia was west of Judah on the Mediterranean coast. These countries were traditional enemies of Israel, but in this song God exults in His power and authority over them.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">cast my shoe.</span> A gesture of contempt, or possibly a claim to ownership (Ruth 4:7).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:9–12</span> Raises the psalmist’s questions and his faith in a good outcome.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:9 me.</span> Likely the king, who speaks on behalf of the nation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.60.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 60:12 do valiantly.</span> The psalmist confesses that it is only through God’s power that they will win the victory. This is the primary attitude that motivates Israel’s wars in the OT.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 61</span> The psalm has two strophes (vv. 1–4 and 6–8; see Introduction to Hebrew Poetry). Both contain petitions and end with reference to vows.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:1–5</span> A prayer for help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:2 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page900" title="900" />end of the earth.</span> The psalmist means that he is at a distance from the sanctuary on Mount Zion and feels himself to be far from God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">rock.</span> He comes to the critical recognition that he does not have the strength to rescue himself; he can only turn to God in trust.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:3 against the enemy.</span> God has protected the writer in the past against his enemies. This phrase leads us to believe that the psalmist is not only physically distant from the temple but is also engaged in a military action for which he needs God’s help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:4</span> The psalmist yearns for God’s fellowship. See v. 2.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shelter of your wings.</span> Some see here a metaphor for God’s compassion, as in the protection of the mother bird for her young. However, David’s reference to the familiar wings of the cherubim portrayed on the ark of the covenant seems more likely.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:5 my vows.</span> In the process of petitioning the Lord, the psalmist has made promises of obedience. See 22:22; 1 Sam. 1:11.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">heritage.</span> As a member of God’s community, he receives the promises of the covenant, including the land of Israel and the promise of God’s protection.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:6–8</span> A prayer for the king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:6 life of the king.</span> Israel’s king was the center of the social order in Israel. The stability of that office affected the stability of the society as a whole. The earthly king was a symbol of the divine King. When Christ came, His gospel announced the kingdom of heaven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.61.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 61:7 enthroned forever.</span> Jesus Christ, David’s greater Son, fulfilled this verse.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> Specifically, lovingkindness toward those with whom God is in covenantal relationship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 62</span> Raises the question of the ultimate source of one’s well-being: wealth and power, or God. The answer lies in the center of the poem (v. 7): “On God rests my salvation and my glory; my mighty rock, my refuge is God.” This central line is preceded by an eight-line stanza (vv. 1–6) that expresses quiet confidence in God and is followed by another eight-line stanza that encourages confidence in God, not in wealth or power (vv. 8–12).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:1–6</span> The verses express quiet confidence in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:1 waits in silence.</span> Lit. “is silent.” To wait quietly is a challenge when there is trouble all around.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:2 rock . . . fortress.</span> Portrayals of God’s protection from the dangers of life. See note on 28:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I shall not be greatly shaken.</span> The psalm lays hold of the promise given, for example, in 55:22.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:3 leaning wall . . . tottering fence.</span> The modern idiom is to “kick a man when he’s down.” The wicked continue to take advantage of the weak.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:4 They bless.</span> The wicked add hypocrisy to violence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page901" title="901" />my hope.</span> His hope to be saved from the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:6 I shall not be shaken.</span> See note on v. 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:7</span> Expresses confidence in God alone.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my glory.</span> The psalmist’s sense of dignity and reputation in the community.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:8–12</span> These verses encourage ultimate confidence in God, not in wealth or power.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:8 O people.</span> The psalmist turns to the faithful in the congregation and encourages them to put their trust in God alone.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">pour out your heart before him.</span> One’s deepest and most private thoughts and feelings are safe with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:9 breath . . . breath.</span> The Hebrew word for “breath” is translated variously in different contexts. It is the most characteristic word of Ecclesiastes, where it is often translated “vanity.” The point in this verse is that people are meaningless and without consequence in and of themselves. The psalmist takes comfort in this; his persecutors, in reality, are not significant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:10 riches increase.</span> Doubt arises when people become rich through evil means (Ps. 73). In this psalm, the author clearly sees that such riches are transitory.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.62.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 62:12 steadfast love.</span> God is not only able to save the psalmist; He desires to do so.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">render . . . according to his work.</span> The psalmist has a long-range perspective here, since at present the righteous are often at the mercy of the wicked. From the NT we understand that there will be many unresolved injustices in the present life until Christ returns.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 63</span> Guides us in the search for answers when we find ourselves in the “wilderness,” the times in life when we experience desolation in the form of sorrow, confusion, loneliness, barrenness, or lifelessness. Verses 1–4 take us on the search, and verses 5–11 guide us to the destination.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:title</span> The setting of the psalm is the desert of Judah.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:1–4</span> These verses take us on the search.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:1 earnestly . . . thirsts.</span> The search here is reminiscent of that in Pss. 42; 43.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my flesh.</span> The book of Psalms permits no false spiritualization. The whole person, not merely the nonphysical aspect of the person, yearns for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:2 sanctuary.</span> The psalmist remembers the place of God’s appointment, and the vision of God’s “power” and “glory” entrusted to him there. See 42:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:3 your steadfast love.</span> The unchanging love God shows toward those joined to Him by His covenant.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:5–11</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page902" title="902" />These verses guide us to the destination.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:5 satisfied.</span> Only in praise to God, in intimate communion with Him, will the psalmist feel spiritually content.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:6 when I remember you.</span> The destiny of the search is the presence of God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">watches of the night.</span> The psalmist has confidence in the Lord when he is most vulnerable to fear and attack.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:7 your wings.</span> God may be compared to a mother bird who protects her young, but see note on 61:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:8 soul clings.</span> Though far removed from the sanctuary, the place where he has experienced God’s presence, the psalmist still enjoys intimate communion with Him. Clinging to the Lord means finding in Him one’s only hope (Deut. 10:20; 11:22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:9 seek to destroy my life.</span> The first indication in the poem of the psalmist’s distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.63.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 63:11 who swear by him shall exult.</span> God’s justice wins. Those who love God will continue to praise Him, but the wicked will be stifled.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 64</span> A lament that is loosely arranged in a concentric pattern: a prayer for relief (vv. 1, 2), a description of distress (vv. 3–6), a description of deliverance (vv. 7–9), and a promise of rejoicing (v. 10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:1, 2</span> These verses are a prayer for relief.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:1 dread of the enemy.</span> David asks for protection from his own fears, not from the enemies themselves. Because unnamed, the “enemy” can apply to any adversary.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:3–6</span> These verses are a description of distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:3 like swords . . . bitter words like arrows.</span> The Bible consistently teaches that words are powerful and can be used for good (Prov. 25:15) or evil (Prov. 12:18; 25:18). Frequently in the laments, words are used as weapons.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:5 Who can see them.</span> They do not fear men, and by their question they show they do not fear God. They think their acts go unnoticed, forgetting that there is a just God in heaven who watches their every move (Ps. 2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:6 accomplished a diligent search.</span> To their other crimes, these evildoers add the sin of pride.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:7–9</span> These verses are a description of deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:7 shoots his arrow.</span> Cf. v. 4. Some of the same words are used to highlight the reversal. The wicked who try to shoot the righteous are themselves struck by the arrows of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page903" title="903" />their own tongues.</span> Cf. v. 3. God reverses the effects of their tongues. They want to use their tongues against the psalmist; they finally incriminate themselves.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:9 fears.</span> Seeing God’s justice, the world will be startled by the judgment of the wicked. People of the world will reconsider their own acts in the light of God’s dealings with the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.64.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 64:10</span> This verse is a promise of rejoicing.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">rejoice . . . refuge . . . exult.</span> God’s people can rejoice because God is their refuge. Cf. 5:11.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 65</span> A hymn of praise to God for sending rain in answer to prayer, since Israel’s agricultural economy depended on rainfall, the amount of which was commonly variable. There are three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): praise for God’s presence (vv. 1–4), praise for God’s awesome deeds (vv. 5–8), and praise for God’s provision (vv. 9–13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:1–4</span> These verses offer praise for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:1 Praise is due to you.</span> In the Masoretic Text, lit. “praise is silence,” which makes no sense. The Masoretes who produced the Masoretic Text added vowel points to assist readers centuries after the prophets penned the original consonantal text. Here it appears that the Masoretes made an error when they added the vowel points, but that does not affect the inspiration of the texts, since only the consonantal text is inspired. A slight revocalization of one word results in “is due/fitting.” The opening words set the tone of the psalm.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">in Zion.</span> The location chosen by God for the temple and the place toward which praise is directed. See notes on 50:2; 128:5; 129:5; and especially 2:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">vows.</span> When Israel brought petitions before the Lord, they frequently promised to offer sacrifices in response to answered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:3 iniquities prevail.</span> That is, when overwhelmed by sin.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">our transgressions.</span> The psalmist moves seamlessly from the individual to the group. God in His grace, however, forgives; this is a source of great joy to the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:4 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you choose.</span> God’s free grace is the source of blessing, and the highest blessing of all is to enjoy His fellowship (16:11).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:5–8</span> These verses offer praise for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:5 awesome deeds.</span> God is not a distant deity who has nothing to do with His creation. He answers prayer by intervening in history and in the lives of His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">ends of the earth.</span> In the theologies of the surrounding lands, it was thought that there were different gods for different localities; e.g., Marduk of Babylon and Baal of Ugarit. The psalmist knows that the Lord is not simply another god among many; He is the God of the universe.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:6 the mountains.</span> A symbol of firmness and strength. God’s creation of them shows His power and greatness (46:2, 3 and notes).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">girded with might.</span> God is clothed with power as a divine warrior who conquers the enemies of Israel (Ex. 15; Josh. 5:13–15; Judg. 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:7 roaring of their waves.</span> The seas represent chaos and evil (77:16–19 and notes), often the chaos and evil of surrounding nations who attack Israel (Dan. 7).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">tumult of the peoples.</span> God’s victories in Israel’s history are an application of His cosmic victory at the time of creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page904" title="904" />dwell at the ends of the earth.</span> A deeper meaning of this verse was brought to light in the coming of Christ and the preaching of the gospel throughout the world.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:9–13</span> These verses offer praise for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:9, 10 water it.</span> Describes the onset of the “early rain” (Deut. 11:14) in October and November. Cf. 1 Kin. 17–19, the time of Elijah, when God cursed His rebellious people by withholding the rain.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:11 bounty.</span> Refers to abundant rain. This verse describes the heavy rains of December through February.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">wagon tracks overflow with abundance.</span> The “wagon tracks” refer to God’s chariot that brings rain; cf. 104:3, where God “makes the clouds his chariot. He rides on the wings of the wind” to bring rain.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:12, 13</span> Describes the time of the “later rain” (Deut. 11:14) in March and April.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.65.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 65:12 pastures of the wilderness overflow.</span> That is, with abundant fruitfulness.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">hills gird themselves with joy.</span> An example of brevity of speaking: the hills are covered with the crops that fill the farmer with joy.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shout and sing together for joy.</span> This is either personification with the creation singing or metonymy for the farmers singing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 66</span> A sequel to Ps. 65, which focuses on God’s awesome deeds in creation (v. 5). Ps. 66 focuses on God’s awesome deeds in redemption (v. 3). There is a shift at v. 13 from the community to the individual.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:1–12</span> Focuses on the community at worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:3 awesome.</span> Great and fearful.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">cringing.</span> When God appears as a warrior, the enemies have reason to fear they will be destroyed (Josh. 2:11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:5 Come and see.</span> The psalmist invites the hearer to remember God’s great acts in history (46:8).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">awesome in his deeds.</span> The next verse tells us that this awesome deed for all of humanity was the crossing of the Red Sea. While this event was for Israel in the short term, in the long term all of humanity was in view.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:6 sea . . . river.</span> The first phrase of this verse refers to crossing the Red Sea (Ex. 14; 15). The second may refer to the crossing of the Red Sea or, less likely, to crossing the Jordan forty years later (Josh. 3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:9 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page905" title="905" />kept our soul.</span> A general truth, but there may be an allusion to the exodus. A context of Israel’s more recent testing is also possible.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:10 tested us.</span> God occasionally laid difficult decisions before His people to see whether they would be obedient to Him in spite of their suffering (Ex. 15:25).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">as silver.</span> When silver is refined, it is purified; the dross is taken away. When God tests His people, those who are not obedient are taken away while the faithful remain steadfast.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:11 into the net.</span> The Lord has brought the psalmist and the faithful through a period of affliction.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:12 place of abundance.</span> A possible reference to recent salvation from distress, but there may also be an allusion to Israel’s conquest of Canaan.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:13–20</span> Focuses on the individual at worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:13 perform my vows.</span> The psalmist expresses his individual thanks. Apparently, God had recently saved him from some distress. While he was suffering, he promised to worship God with sacrifices if God heard his prayer (22:22 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.66.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 66:16 Come and hear.</span> Often, the fulfilling of the vow leads to public praise, witnessing to God’s salvation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 67</span> The psalm is concentrically arranged: blessing for the nations (vv. 1, 2), the nations glorifying and enjoying God (vv. 3–5), and blessing for the nations (vv. 6, 7). The universal scope of this psalm is striking, even in a book where such far-reaching vision is not rare.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:1, 2</span> A prayer for God to bless His people for the sake of the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:1 his face to shine upon us.</span> The psalmist picks up the standard priestly blessing found in Num. 6:25. The thing promised in the blessing is that God will be present.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:2 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page906" title="906" />all nations.</span> God is sovereign over all, not merely of a particular country.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:3–5</span> These verses are a prayer for God to be glorified and enjoyed by the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:3 Let the peoples.</span> The psalmist’s desire to see peoples from many different nations praise the Lord was begun in a new way when the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ broke down “the dividing wall of hostility” (Eph. 2:14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:6, 7</span> A promise that God will bless His people for the sake of the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.67.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 67:6 has yielded.</span> While the form of the verb in Hebrew is typical for a past action, here it is used rhetorically for the certainty of a future action.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Increase.</span> The psalm may have been sung at one of the agricultural festivals, such as the Feast of Ingathering (Ex. 23:14–17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 68</span> The psalm celebrates the reign of God, though it has an enigmatic quality, owing both to the rare vocabulary it contains and to the seemingly disconnected nature of the various sections. Yet there are common themes and attitudes in the psalm. It has a hymn-like mood of joy with frequent allusions to community worship. God appears as a warrior at its center. His victory over His enemies as expressed here is used by Paul in Eph. 4:7–13 as a picture for Jesus’ victory over the forces of Satan at His ascension.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:1 God shall arise.</span> See Num. 10:35. These were the first words Moses spoke each day before Israel marched during the wilderness period. As he spoke, the ark of the covenant was raised to lead the procession.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:2 smoke . . . wax.</span> The two images call on God to deal with the enemy quickly.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:4 rides through the deserts.</span> Better, “rides on the clouds.” See v. 33, where God “rides in the heavens”; see also the reference to rain in vv. 8, 9 and the reference to God riding His cloud/chariot to bring rain in 104:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:5 fatherless . . . widows.</span> Widows and orphans were particularly vulnerable in ancient society. God commanded Israel to care for them (Ex. 22:22; Deut. 10:18; Ruth 4:14, 15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:6 the solitary.</span> Since the family was the center of Israelite society, those outside of its structure were alone and often needy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:7 through the wilderness.</span> The reference is to the forty years of wilderness wanderings.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page907" title="907" />the earth quaked.</span> God made the earth shake at Sinai (Ex. 19:18, 19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:9 Rain in abundance.</span> An essential blessing in a land without rivers for irrigation. Long droughts had devastating effects (1 Kin. 17–19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:11 great host.</span> A military term.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:12 divide the spoil.</span> See Judg. 5:30.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:16 the mount that God desired for his abode.</span> The Bashan mountains are physically majestic, far more imposing than Zion, but the latter’s glory surpasses the former’s. That is because Zion’s majesty is spiritual, not physical.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:18 receiving gifts.</span> In Eph. 4:8 Paul writes “gave gifts.” In a procession of triumph, the victor would receive and distribute gifts.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:19 daily bears us up.</span> God cares for His people and is constantly in touch with their needs. Cf. Is. 46:1–4, where the prophet decries the inability of the idols to care for their worshipers.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:20 God of salvation.</span> The Lord saves His people from illness and from death in battle. In Jesus Christ His people learn that He, by His resurrection, delivers from death by obtaining eternal life for them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:22 from Bashan.</span> Likely a reference to the defeat of Og, king of Bashan in the period before the conquest of the land (Deut. 3).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">depths of the sea.</span> God delivered Israel from death at the Red Sea (Ex. 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:24 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page908" title="908" />Your procession.</span> After being led by God in battle, the army would return to the city of Jerusalem, carrying the ark with them (Ps. 24). Worshiping crowds would accompany it to the temple.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:29 Because of your temple.</span> Jerusalem’s prestige has a single, spiritual cause: God chose it as a special place of His dwelling in that era (Deut. 12; 2 Sam. 7; cf. Is. 22:1, 2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.30"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:30 Rebuke.</span> More than a verbal assault, to “rebuke” a nation is to destroy it.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">beasts . . . reeds.</span> Either the crocodile or the hippopotamus, both symbols of Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:31 Cush.</span> A traditional ally of Egypt (Nah. 3:9). Cush is the remote land south of Egypt, including parts of modern Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Sudan.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.68.33"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 68:33 rides in the heavens.</span> The psalmist poetically alludes to the heavens as God’s war chariot.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 69</span> The cry of a soul that has been in distress for a long time and yet still trusts in God to bring salvation. This psalm is well known because of its application in the NT to the anguish of Jesus, God’s righteous servant, as He sought His Father’s will during His earthly ministry.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:1–4</span> Describes an overwhelming flood.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:1 waters.</span> The psalmist pictures his distress as one slowly sinking down in a river. The raging waters are a frequent biblical illustration of social or personal chaos. See notes on 18:4; 46:2, 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:2 flood sweeps over me.</span> The poetic language in this section can be compared to a water ordeal, in which a person suspected of a crime might be cast into a river. The river was expected to overwhelm and carry away the guilty but to release the innocent.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:5–12</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page909" title="909" />Articulates how God knows the psalmist’s humiliation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:5 wrongs I have done.</span> Although the psalmist is innocent of the charges alluded to in v. 4, he does not claim to be without sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:6 those who seek you.</span> The psalmist is concerned not for himself only but for others in Israel who might be injured in some way through his sins. His power and prominence in society increases the likelihood that his sins will affect others.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:9 for your house.</span> This verse is applied to Jesus as He cleared the temple of money changers (John 2:17) and by doing good attracted the hatred of the wicked. Enmity directed toward God may cause suffering for those who are being conformed to Him (Rom. 15:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:11 made sackcloth my clothing.</span> When the psalmist performs religious acts such as fasting, he must bear the brunt of ridicule from rich and poor alike (v. 12).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:13–18</span> A prayer for the flood not to overwhelm the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:15 Let not the flood sweep over me.</span> See v. 2.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">pit.</span> See Prov. 1:12; Is. 5:14; and notes.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:19–28</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page910" title="910" />Articulates how God knows the psalmist’s humiliation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:21 poison . . . sour wine.</span> The bitterness of gall is proverbial. When the psalmist suffers such maltreatment, he responds with a curse (vv. 22–29). The metaphor became a reality when Jesus Christ was offered vinegar at His crucifixion (John 19:29). He responded with compassion for those who tormented Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:25 May their camp be a desolation.</span> The psalmist asks for the death of the wicked (v. 28). Peter cited this verse in connection with the death of Judas Iscariot and the void he left among the disciples (Acts 1:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:26 they persecute him whom you have struck down.</span> The enemy furthers the pain of the afflicted. If God chastises someone, this is no excuse for others to increase his pain.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:29–36</span> A prayer for rescue for the praise of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.30"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:30 I will praise.</span> The transition from pain and the call for judgment to resolute praise is abrupt. Such compression of thought is not unusual in biblical poetry.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:31 more than an ox.</span> An ox was the most expensive sacrifice possible in ancient Israel. God is concerned with genuine praise, not wealth (50:12–14, 23; Hos. 14:2; Rom. 15:6; Heb. 13:15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.32"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:32, 33 humble . . . needy.</span> The way to God is open to the humble poor.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.69.35"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 69:35 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page911" title="911" />build up the cities of Judah.</span> The last verses were probably added later than David, during or shortly after the exile of the Jews to Babylon in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span></p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 70</span> The psalm is nearly identical to 40:13–17 and is concentrically arranged: the psalmist needs rescue (v. 1); prayer regarding those who search for the psalmist (vv. 2, 3); prayer regarding those who search for the Lord (v. 4); and the psalmist is poor and needy (v. 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:title</span> This title is used elsewhere only for Ps. 38.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:1 Make haste . . . to deliver me.</span> In his desperate plight, the psalmist boldly asks the Lord to come to his rescue.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:2, 3</span> These verses are a prayer regarding those who search for the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:2 who seek my life.</span> The theme of the strophe (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">be turned back and brought to dishonor.</span> The psalmist wants the Lord to turn the tables on the enemy. They seek his ruin and his life; he asks God to ruin them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:4 all who seek you.</span> That is, the Lord. The theme of the strophe is a prayer regarding those who search for the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.70.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 70:5</span> This verse focuses on the psalmist as poor and needy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 71</span> A lament that articulates both sorrow and joy (2 Cor. 6:10). Given the close connection of Ps. 71 with Ps. 70 (a psalm of David), it is possible to read Ps. 71 as written by David in his “old age” (v. 9)</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:2 In your righteousness.</span> See note on 31:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:3 you have given the command.</span> While the form of the verb in Hebrew is typical for a past action, here in the context of a number of imperatives it is used as an imperative.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">my rock and my fortress.</span> God is the psalmist’s only place of protection. See note on 61:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:5 from my youth.</span> The language of the psalmist shows that he is now an older man (see v. 9). He is in a position where he can look back over his life and ponder his relationship with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:6 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page912" title="912" />from my mother’s womb.</span> The psalmist confesses that God created him for a gracious purpose.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:11 God has forsaken him.</span> Like Job’s friends, the psalmist’s enemies have come to the wrong conclusion about his suffering.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:14 hope continually.</span> He can look back over his long life and see how God has saved him in the past. His memory serves as a bulwark of devotion.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:15 their number is past my knowledge.</span> Uninterrupted praise cannot adequately express God’s mercy; His salvation is beyond comprehension.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:18 another generation.</span> It is the duty of the older members of God’s community to teach the young what God has done for His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:19 reaches the high heavens.</span> God’s righteousness is so great it cannot be contained. It is without limit.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">who is like you.</span> A rhetorical question—to ask it is to answer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:20 You . . . made me see . . . troubles.</span> The psalmist knows that life is hard and that God has not sheltered him from every difficulty. Nonetheless, he has confidence that God will deliver him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.71.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 71:21 comfort me again.</span> Job is an example of someone restored after a time of intense suffering. But this kind of restoration does not always happen during earthly existence (Luke 16:25; Rom. 8:18; 2 Cor. 4:17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 72</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page913" title="913" />A prayer for the king, composed of three strophes (vv. 1–7, 8–14, 15–17; see Introduction to Hebrew Poetry); a benediction (vv. 18, 19); and a postscript (v. 20). Some of the language goes beyond what applies literally to the earthly king, anticipating the Messiah.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:title</span> See Introduction: Author. The Septuagint understands the title to name Solomon as the subject rather than the author of the psalm. The traditional understanding of the Hebrew is that the title indicates authorship.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:1–7</span> A prayer for a righteous and prosperous reign.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:1 justice . . . righteousness.</span> God, the divine king, is the source of all justice and righteousness. If the human king is to have such qualities, he must receive them from God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:2 your people.</span> The human king receives his calling from the divine King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:3 prosperity.</span> Heb. <span class="italic">shalom</span>. Under the terms of the Mosaic covenant, a just and righteous reign should also be a prosperous reign. See note on 122:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:4 poor . . . needy.</span> The king had a special responsibility to the vulnerable in society. God has a special concern and love for the poor, and the earthly king must take special care of them. See note on 9:18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:5 sun . . . moon.</span> For the sun and moon in an image of longevity, see 89:36, 37. As applied to an earthly king, this is a poetic overstatement. The language looks forward to the one King who will live forever (Luke 1:33; Heb. 7:16; Rev. 11:15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:7 peace.</span> Better, “prosperity” for Heb. <span class="italic">shalom</span> in this psalm (see v. 3).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:8–14</span> A prayer for a worldwide reign.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:8 from sea to sea.</span> There is an allusion here to the promised boundaries of Ex. 23:31, but the language far exceeds any achievement of any earthly king of Israel and so looks forward to the Messiah’s reign.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:9 desert tribes.</span> He will subdue the rebellious tribes of the desert.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:10 Tarshish . . . Sheba . . . Seba.</span> These places were considered remote. Tarshish is usually associated with Tartessus in Spain. Sheba and probably Seba are in southern Arabia.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:15–17</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page914" title="914" />A prayer for a long reign.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:17 May his name endure forever.</span> The verse recalls the Abrahamic promises of Gen. 12:2, 3. The king is a focal point for the society of God’s people, for he represents the people and is the heir of the promises. In Jesus Christ these promises come to fulfillment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:18, 19</span> A doxology that concludes Book 2 (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes). The doxology in all likelihood is an independent poem.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Blessed be.</span> God is blessed in response to all the blessings he has granted in Pss. 42–72.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.72.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 72:20</span> A postscript. Ps. 72 is the last psalm of a Davidic collection that was incorporated in the book of Psalms as the process of collecting continued. This verse cannot be applied strictly to every psalm in Pss. 1–72.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 73</span> The psalm begins with an assertion that God is good, a belief won only after long struggle with what is observed in the world, especially the prosperity of the wicked. This important theme is also treated in Pss. 37; 49; and the book of Job. Based on the threefold use of Hebrew <span class="italic">ak</span> in v. 1 (“truly”), v. 13 (not translated), and v. 18 (“truly”), the psalm is divided into three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): the crisis of faith (vv. 1–12), the turning point in the crisis (vv. 13–17), and the resolution of the crisis (vv. 18–28).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:1–12</span> These verses articulate the crisis of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:1 God is good.</span> What clouded the psalmist’s heart and troubled his relationship with the Lord has been resolved but only through struggle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:2 my feet had almost stumbled.</span> An obedient life is often compared to a walk along a straight path (Prov. 1–9). The psalmist describes doubt and skepticism with the image of falling off a path.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:6 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page915" title="915" />pride is their necklace.</span> The prosperity of the wicked leads to the deeper sins of pride and violence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:7 eyes swell out.</span> A figure for a heart made insensitive by overindulgence (1 John 2:16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:9 against the heavens.</span> The proud are not afraid to talk as if they had created the world themselves, leaving God behind (Acts 20:22).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:13–17</span> These verses articulate the turning point in the crisis.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:13 in vain.</span> Shows the poet’s attitude before he resolved the issue in his mind.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:15 If I had said.</span> If he had broadcast his doubts and complaints before coming to a solution, he would have instilled doubt in the community of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:16 this.</span> The prosperity of the wicked and the suffering of the righteous.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:17 into the sanctuary.</span> The change came for him when he entered the presence of God revealed in the temple.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">their end.</span> Though the wicked may prosper for a time, their final lot is destruction.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:20 Like a dream.</span> God will come in judgment against the wicked. When He does, their prosperity will seem like a dream.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:22 brutish and ignorant.</span> His negative emotions blocked clear thinking about God and His ways.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:23 you hold my right hand.</span> God is close to the worshiper to counsel and guide him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:24 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page916" title="916" />to glory.</span> While some take this as a reference to eternal glory, a reference to earthly fame and reputation is more likely.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:25 nothing . . . besides you.</span> An example of hyperbole to emphasize the fact that God is the psalmist’s ultimate desire (cf. 16:2 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.73.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 73:28 good to be near God.</span> The presence of God is the ultimate resolution to the problem of the prosperity of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 74</span> A lament for the destruction of the temple in 586 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> comparable to the mournful poems of Lamentations. It articulates those times in life when circumstances offer no evidence that God is present or in control. The psalm has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): the agonizing “why?” (vv. 1–11), an affirmation that God is king (vv. 12–17), and petitions that God remember His people (vv. 18–23).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:1–11</span> These verses express the agonizing “why?” of the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:1 why do you cast us off forever.</span> Israel’s defeat at the hands of the Babylonians indicated that God had abandoned His chosen people and would protect them no longer. The prophets describe God’s abandonment of His temple, blaming it on Israel’s sin and unbelief (e.g., Ezek. 9–11). See note on 22:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">sheep.</span> The writer appeals to this metaphor of intimate relationship between God and His people in order to plead for restoration. See 23:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:2 Remember.</span> The psalmist means more than mental recall; he wants God to act on His ancient covenant promise to save His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Mount Zion.</span> The location of the temple and the place where God made His presence known in a special way. See 2:6; 50:2; 128:5; 129:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:3 Direct your steps.</span> The psalmist asks God to survey and react to the damage the enemy inflicted on His possessions. When Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem in 586 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> he ordered the sanctuary to be demolished.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:9 do not see our signs . . . any prophet.</span> The worst fear is that God will be silent in the face of destruction. This psalm was likely written soon after the event, since a number of prophets were active during the period of restoration.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:10 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page917" title="917" />revile your name.</span> The psalmist tries to persuade God by arguing that His reputation is in danger. Asaph is distressed by God’s apparent inactivity.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:12–17</span> These verses are an affirmation that God is king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:12 Yet God my King.</span> Faith sees the invisible (Heb. 11:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:13, 14 sea . . . sea monsters . . . heads of Leviathan.</span> The poet alludes to a popular concept of creation and applies it to the Lord. These three “monsters” occur in this same order in a related text discovered at ancient Ugarit in Syria. In that text, the monsters are defeated by the goddess Anat at the time of creation. The defeat of the “Sea” refers to God’s work of creation in the first place and then, perhaps, alludes to the exodus, as is clear from the references to creation in vv. 16, 17 and the Ugaritic parallels. The psalmist’s use of this imagery is not meant to endorse the popular myth but to say that the God of Israel is the creator of all. The gods of the Near East are nothing because they do not exist. See 18:4; 29:3, 10; 46:2, 3; 69:1, 2; Jer. 14:22; 1 Cor. 8:4. Implicit in this affirmation of faith is the request for God to do in the psalmist’s presence what He did at the time of creation—eliminate the obstacles to a well-ordered life.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:18–23</span> These verses offer petitions that God remember and not forget His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:18 Remember.</span> The third strophe opens with a call for God to remember.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:20 covenant.</span> The writer appeals to God’s covenant, knowing that His patience is not exhausted despite the disobedience that led to the fall of the northern kingdom in the eighth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span></p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:22 Arise.</span> See note on 7:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.74.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 74:23 Do not forget.</span> The strophe closes with a call for God to not forget His enemies and their opposition to Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 75</span> A song of thanksgiving that has four strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): communal thanksgiving (v. 1), a divine oracle (vv. 2–5), a prophetic oracle (vv. 6–8), and individual thanksgiving (vv. 9, 10). The theme of casting down the wicked and lifting up the righteous is also found in Hannah’s song (1 Sam. 2:1–10) and Mary’s words of praise (Luke 1:46–55).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:1 We.</span> The psalm begins as a communal thanksgiving, though at the end an individual speaks for the community.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">name.</span> See 8:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page918" title="918" />wondrous deeds.</span> God’s great acts in history (Rev. 15:3, 4).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:2–5</span> These verses are a divine oracle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:2 judge with equity.</span> God’s judgments are always just, and He knows the secrets of the heart.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:3 keep steady its pillars.</span> God provides the underlying stability of the world order.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:4 horn.</span> This common metaphor is one of a powerful horned beast proudly lifting up its head in defiance and anger. God warns the wicked not to act in this way against Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:6–8</span> These verses are a prophetic oracle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:6, 7 God . . . executes judgment.</span> God and not any person in any other place determines what shall stand.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:8 cup.</span> See note on 11:6.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:9–10</span> These verses are individual thanksgiving.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.75.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 75:9 But I.</span> An individual, probably the king, now speaks.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 76</span> A psalm of Zion that focuses more on the God of Zion than on Zion itself. There are four strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): God is known among His people (vv. 1–3), God is majestic in battle (vv. 4–6), God is awesome in judgment (vv. 7–10), and God is awesome among the nations (vv. 11, 12). From the NT perspective, this song praises God for His victory at the cross and looks forward to the great final victory over evil at the end of the age (Rev. 19:11–21).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:1–3</span> These verses teach that God is known among His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:2 Salem . . . his dwelling place.</span> Salem is the ancient name for Jerusalem. God’s tabernacle is His sanctuary. The tabernacle was a tent, but the temple that replaced it could still be called a “tent” poetically.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zion.</span> The mountain where the temple was situated (2:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:3 he broke.</span> God defeated the enemy at Jerusalem. A good example of such a battle is the siege by Sennacherib in 701 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> (2 Kin. 19; Is. 37).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:4–6</span> These verses teach that God is majestic in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:4 Glorious.</span> See John 1:4–9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:5 stouthearted were stripped of their spoil.</span> God has destroyed powerful soldiers; they are no match for Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:6 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page919" title="919" />rebuke.</span> God’s rebuke is the word of His powerful judgment. At His rebuke the forces of chaos and evil flee before Him, and peace reigns (Nah. 1:4; Matt. 8:23–27; 17:18).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:7–10</span> These verses teach that God is awesome in judgment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:10 wrath . . . shall praise you.</span> God’s wrath brings praise because it is directed against the wicked and unjust, who afflict the poor and vulnerable (9:18 note).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:11–12</span> These verses teach that God is awesome among the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.76.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 76:11 vows.</span> See Lev. 27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 77</span> An individual prays on behalf of the community (vv. 7–9). A deep lament (vv. 1–9) is followed by eloquent reflection on the exodus (vv. 10–20).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:1–9</span> These verses are a lament.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:2 my hand is stretched out.</span> A common gesture of prayer was reaching out toward heaven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:5 days of old.</span> The days when God was near and acted to save Israel from distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:7 spurn.</span> The Lord had promised to be with His people, and His people had to obey in gratitude for His presence. Though God is longsuffering, at times His patience runs out (1 Sam. 4; Lam. 1–5; Ezek. 9–11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:9 Has God forgotten to be gracious.</span> It is impossible that God should cease to be merciful, but the distress of life elicits these questions in the psalmist.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:10–20</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page920" title="920" />This reflection on the exodus provides light for the psalmist in the darkness of lamentation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:10 I will appeal to this.</span> This verse provides a crucial transition in the psalm. By remembering God’s great acts in the past, the poet builds confidence in the present and for the future.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">years of the right hand.</span> When God’s power was seen to act for them (Ex. 15:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:13 great.</span> As the writer remembers God’s great acts in the past, he is reminded of God’s attributes: holiness and unique power.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:15 redeemed your people.</span> The context shows that the psalmist has in mind the deliverance of Israel from Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:16 waters.</span> In this poetic remembrance of the exodus, the waters of the Red Sea are personified. In this way the crossing of the Red Sea is pictured as a battle against the waters of chaos (18:4; 29:3, 10; 46:2, 3 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:19 your footprints were unseen.</span> God’s action was from above, not controlled by the constraints of earthly conditions.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.77.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 77:20 You led your people like a flock.</span> The crossing of the Red Sea was a violent conflict; in this verse, the mood is calm as the Shepherd of Israel leads His people through the desert (23:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 78</span> A historical psalm with the express purpose of passing on instruction (v. 1) about God’s justice and mercy and about the response of faith and obedience. After a wisdom-based introduction (vv. 1–8), there are two recitations of history: vv. 9–39 and vv. 40–72, both of which begin with God’s acts in Egypt.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:1–8</span> This introduction provides the purpose of the poem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:1 teaching.</span> From the Heb. word <span class="italic">torah</span>, which here means instruction, not law. See note on 1:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:2 in a parable.</span> The writer will recount the events of the past in a poetic way designed to instruct the hearts of distant generations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:3 told us.</span> Instruction was disseminated in his family from generation to generation (Deut. 6:4–9; 32:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page921" title="921" />testimony . . . law.</span> God established a relationship with His people based on grace alone. In this context He gave them laws to live by so that they could show their gratitude to Him. These laws are summarized in the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20; Deut. 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:6 tell them to their children.</span> See note on v. 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:7 keep his commandments.</span> The object of the history lesson is not merely antiquarian but to deepen the faith and obedience of God’s people (see 105:45).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:9–39</span> These verses are the first of two recitations of Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:9 Ephraimites.</span> Cf. vv. 67, 68, where the choice of Judah is coupled with the rejection of Ephraim.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:10 God’s covenant.</span> God promised to protect His people if they obeyed the terms of His covenant but to destroy them if they disobeyed (Deut. 27:9—28:68).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:13 He divided the sea.</span> Chief among the great acts of God was the deliverance from Egypt by which God rescued His people from slavery and brought them into their own land. The Red Sea crossing was the greatest demonstration of God’s power in the past and, accordingly, was often called to memory by psalmists and prophets.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:18 tested God.</span> Israel grumbled about the food in the wilderness time and time again, and God provided for their needs (Ex. 16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:20 Can he also give bread.</span> God’s provision of water in the wilderness should have led to faith and trust. Instead, the Israelites tested the Lord by asking for food (cf. John 6:25–58).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:21 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page922" title="922" />full of wrath.</span> Rebellion against the Lord led to His judgment (Num. 11:1–3). After judging the people, He returned with His grace (vv. 23–39), but the people responded to grace only with further rebellion (vv. 40, 41). This is the story of Israel throughout the OT, perhaps best represented in the book of Judges (see Judg. 2:6–23). Heb. 12:1–12 reminds us that God chastises those whom He loves.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.33"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:33 like a breath.</span> The same word as that found in the opening of Ecclesiastes: “vanity” (Eccl. 1:2). It describes the world apart from God and under the curse of the fall. Apart from God, humanity has nothing—only the fear of death and the void.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.37"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:37 faithful to his covenant.</span> See v. 10. God initiated a relationship with Israel through His grace and then revealed His will to them through His law, including the curses and blessings of the covenant. The people disobeyed the law and brought on themselves God’s judgment.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:40–72</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page923" title="923" />These verses are the second recitation of Israel’s history.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.40"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:40 often they rebelled.</span> Examples include Num. 11; 14; 16.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:44–51</span> He lists six of the plagues of Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.52"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:52 like a flock.</span> See 77:20.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:54–64</span> God blessed them with the Promised Land, but they quickly forgot Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.55"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:55 He drove out nations.</span> Israel fought, but the faithful knew that it was God, the divine warrior, who actually won the victories against the enemies. The story of the defeat of Jericho was a model for the battles of the conquest under Joshua (Josh. 5:13—6:27).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.56"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:56 tested . . . the Most High God.</span> They did not keep His law in the desert, nor did they keep it in the Promised Land. See Judg. 2:10–15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.58"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:58 their idols.</span> The height of their rebellion was to worship false gods.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.60"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:60 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page924" title="924" />dwelling at Shiloh.</span> Soon after entering the Promised Land, the tabernacle was set up in Shiloh (Josh. 18:1), twenty miles (32 km) northeast of Jerusalem, in the tribal territory of Ephraim.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.61"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:61 his power to captivity.</span> During Samuel’s youth, God punished Israel and its leaders, particularly Eli’s sons, by abandoning Israel in battle and allowing the Philistines to capture the ark (1 Sam. 4; 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.65"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:65 as from sleep.</span> God had left Israel temporarily and seemed to be asleep. An unusual figure of speech explains how He began to act.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.67"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:67 He rejected.</span> The rejection of the tribe of Ephraim refers to the abandonment of the Shiloh sanctuary and perhaps also the rejection of Saul’s monarchy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.68"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:68 he chose the tribe of Judah.</span> Jerusalem succeeded Shiloh as the designated location for the worship of God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Mount Zion.</span> See note on 2:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.70"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:70 sheepfolds.</span> Recalls David’s humble origins (1 Sam. 16:11–13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.78.72"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 78:72 upright heart.</span> The psalm climaxes on a positive note with a faithful king in Jerusalem, the place of God’s special presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 79</span> The destruction of the temple (v. 1) dates this psalm to the period after the Babylonian defeat of Jerusalem in 586 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> The psalm articulates the agony of that disaster. The problem (vv. 1–5) is followed by a series of petitions (vv. 6–12), and the psalm ends with a promise of praise (v. 13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:1–5</span> These verses describe the problem of the destruction of the temple and Jerusalem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:1 the nations have come into your inheritance.</span> Because the people disobeyed God’s covenant, He did what He had warned them He would do (Deut. 28:15–68), sending a foreign nation against them. Both city and temple were destroyed at this time (2 Kin. 25; 2 Chr. 36:15–23; Lam. 1–5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:2 your servants . . . your faithful.</span> The faithful also suffered at the hands of the Babylonians. The psalmist singles out the death of the faithful as he appeals to God for restoration.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page925" title="925" />How long.</span> This is a prayer to God to change a hard situation. See 6:4; 13:1–2; 74:10; 80:4.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">jealousy.</span> A synonym for anger.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:6–12</span> These verses contain a series of petitions.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:6 Pour out your anger on the nations.</span> The poet calls for a reversal, asking God to turn His wrath from Israel to the nations God was using to punish them. In the end the Lord answered the psalmist’s prayer, restoring Israel and destroying Babylon.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:8 former iniquities.</span> This psalm may have been written some time after the destruction of Jerusalem. The chief sin was idolatry, turning to false gods.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:11 prisoners.</span> The writer knows that God has a special place in His heart for the oppressed and vulnerable, so he reminds the Lord of those who need Him (9:18 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:13</span> This verse is a promise to praise God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.79.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 79:13 generation to generation.</span> See 78:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 80</span> A prayer for restoration to God’s favor that depicts the Lord as both Shepherd and Vinedresser of Israel. The theme is stated in the refrain of vv. 3, 7, 19: “Restore us . . . Let your face shine, that we may be saved!” The psalm is concentrically arranged: asking for the Shepherd’s favor (vv. 1–3), lamenting the Shepherd’s anger (vv. 4–7), lamenting the Vinedresser’s apparent neglect (vv. 8–14a), and asking for the Vinedresser’s favor (vv. 14b–19).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:1–3</span> These verses are a prayer for the Shepherd.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:1 Shepherd.</span> God is Israel’s shepherd (Ps. 23) because He guides His people and provides for them (77:20; 78:52, 71, 72; 79:13). In the ancient Near East, “shepherd” was not an unusual title for kings.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">cherubim.</span> Above the ark of the covenant, in the Most Holy Place of the temple, the wings of the cherubim stretched out over God’s throne (Ex. 25:22; Num. 7:89).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shine forth.</span> An allusion to the priestly benediction in Num. 6:24–26. The psalmist is calling upon God to reveal His gracious presence to them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:2 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page926" title="926" />Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh.</span> The mention of these significant tribes of the northern kingdom may indicate that the psalm was composed in the last days of that kingdom.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:3 Restore us, O God.</span> In this first occurrence of the refrain, God is addressed simply as “God.” See v. 7.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:4–7</span> These verses lament the Shepherd’s anger.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:4 how long.</span> See 79:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:5 bread of tears.</span> Their mourning is so continuous that it is like their daily food and drink.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:7 Restore us, O God of hosts.</span> In this second occurrence of the refrain, God is addressed as “God of hosts.” See vv. 3, 19.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:8–14a</span> These verses lament the Vinedresser’s apparent neglect. In reality, the Lord had not neglected Israel but had allowed the nation to reap the destruction it had sown in its disobedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:8 vine.</span> Israel is the vine God transplanted from slavery in Egypt to the fruitful soil of Palestine (Is. 5:1–7; John 15:1, 2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:10 covered with its shade.</span> The lowly vine became so great through the blessing of God that the mountains and the giant cedars were covered with its shadow (Luke 13:19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:11 sea . . . River.</span> The Mediterranean and the Euphrates. The language is reminiscent of the promises made to Abraham.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:12 Why then have you.</span> The psalmist knows that no matter what human army actually defeated Israel, God had allowed it. God seemed to be turning His back on the people He had created.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:14b–19</span> These verses are a prayer for the Vinedresser’s favor.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:17 son of man.</span> Though the reference might be to Israel, it is more likely to the Davidic king and ultimately to the Messiah.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.80.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 80:19 Restore us, O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">God of hosts.</span> In this third occurrence of the refrain, God is addressed as “<span class="smcaps">Lord</span> God of hosts.” See vv. 3, 7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 81</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page927" title="927" />The psalm begins with praise to God (vv. 1–5a) and ends with preaching by God (vv. 5b–16), providing a sermon that reveals God’s heart.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:1–5a</span> These verses offer praise to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:2 Raise a song.</span> The psalms teach us by example to worship with exuberance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:3 new moon.</span> The Bible occasionally mentions a special celebration that took place at the time of the new moon (1 Sam. 20:5, 18; 2 Kin. 4:23; Is. 66:23; Ezek. 46:1, 6; Amos 8:5). Frequently, the new moon festival is mentioned along with regular Sabbath observance; see also Col. 2:16, 17.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:5 language I had not known.</span> The language may be Egyptian. Another translation is “a voice we did not know,” referring to the verses following.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:5b–16</span> These verses are a sermon by God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:6, 7</span> God responds to the cries of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:6 I relieved . . . the burden.</span> With specific language, God reminds Israel of its slavery in Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:7 secret place of thunder.</span> This may refer to God’s appearance at Mount Sinai (Ex. 19:16–25), although thunder and lightning were frequent signs of His presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Meribah.</span> See Ex. 17:1–7; Num. 20:1–13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:8, 9</span> God warns of danger.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:9 you shall not bow down to a foreign god.</span> The warning implies that Israel was not observing this basic commandment (Ex. 20:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:10</span> God promises abundance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:10 I am the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">your God.</span> Strongly reminiscent of the preamble to the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20:2). The relationship of grace came before revelation of the law.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">I will fill it.</span> Much of Israel’s history, as recorded in Joshua through Chronicles, is the story of God’s people looking for satisfaction without God. If they were worried about rain, they turned to Baal (1 Kin. 18). If they were worried about enemies, they wanted a strong king (1 Sam. 8). They kept forgetting they had a God who could and would fulfill all their needs easily.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:11–15</span> God lets us suffer consequences.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:12 I gave them over.</span> See Rom. 1:24.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:13 Oh, that my people.</span> God’s compassion for Israel is clearly seen in this verse.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:16</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page928" title="928" />God longs to bless us.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.81.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 81:16 finest of the wheat . . . honey from the rock.</span> God longs to satisfy us with the finest of wheat, not just manna, and with honey from the rock, not just water from the rock.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.82.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 82</span> This short psalm presents some difficult problems. Chief among them is the “gods” mentioned in vv. 1, 6. A number of scholars take this as a reference to angelic powers, lesser spiritual beings who make up God’s heavenly council. A second interpretation understands “gods” literally, as deities made subordinate to Yahweh. The most probable interpretation is that the “gods” are human judges. The Hebrew word <span class="italic">elohim</span> (“gods”) is used of human judges in Ex. 21:6; 22:8, 9. Within Ps. 82 the human nature of these gods is indicated by vv. 6, 7. A rough paraphrase is, “As judges, people may call you ‘lord,’ but you are as mortal as anyone else.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.82.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 82:1 divine council.</span> The exact scope of this congregation is unclear. It may be the heavenly assembly (including only spiritual powers), or it may include earthly kings.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.82.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 82:3 the weak.</span> See note on 9:18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.82.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 82:6 You are gods.</span> God is the judge, so human judges functioning as His agents can be called “gods.” Jesus quotes this line in reference to himself in John 10:34.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.82.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 82:8 judge the earth.</span> Since the human judges were failing to reflect His justice, God Himself would have to do it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 83</span> The community lament has two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): a prayer for God’s action (vv. 1–8) and a prayer for God’s vengeance (vv. 9–18). The psalm is a model prayer for the Christian’s spiritual warfare. Instead of calling upon the Lord to destroy one’s flesh-and-blood enemies, He is called upon to vanquish the spiritual forces of evil.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:1–8</span> These verses are a prayer for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:1 do not keep silence . . . hold your peace . . . be still.</span> Three negative imperatives bring out the passion of the plea. The heart of the covenant is the promise that God will be present with His people. To the psalmist’s eyes, God is absent from His people if they are defeated before the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:3 consult together.</span> See 2:1, 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:5 they.</span> The nations involved in the plot against Israel are listed in vv. 6–8. Attempts have been made to identify the historical situation behind the psalm, but no time period is known in which all of these enemies were actively hostile toward Israel at the same time. The closest is Jehoshaphat’s war recorded in 2 Chr. 20, but there is no mention of Assyria there.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page929" title="929" />children.</span> Moab and Ammon (Gen. 19:30–38).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:9–18</span> These verses are a prayer for God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:9 Midian.</span> God enabled Gideon to destroy the Midianites (Judg. 7).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Sisera . . . Jabin.</span> Jabin was a king of Canaan, and Sisera was his general early in the period of the judges. God delivered the Israelites from them through the work of Deborah (Judg. 4; 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:11 Oreb . . . Zeeb.</span> Two leaders who were destroyed by Ephraimites during Gideon’s battle against the Midianites (Judg. 7:25—8:3).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zebah and Zalmunna.</span> Midianite kings who were captured and executed by Gideon (Judg. 8:4–21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:12 pastures of God.</span> The land of Israel, where the shepherd God settled His sheep, the people of Israel. The quote is ascribed to Israel’s enemies in order to highlight the blasphemous nature of their plots against Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:15 your tempest . . . your hurricane.</span> God’s wrath is often compared to a violent storm (18:7–15; Nah. 1:3).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:16 seek your name.</span> The psalm supplies a redemptive reason behind the judgment. As God judges the wickedness of the attackers, they will see their folly and turn to Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.83.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 83:18 Most High.</span> The Hebrew words used sound similar to the most common title of the Canaanite god Baal. The poet is asking God to judge the nations so that they will know that He, not Baal, is the only God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 84</span> A pilgrimage psalm (see Pss. 120–34) that expresses a deep longing to be in the presence of God. While Christians do not travel to a special location to be in God’s presence (John 4:21–24), the psalm articulates their yearning to experience Christ’s nearness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:1 your dwelling place.</span> The temple, the place which God chose to reveal His presence to the people (Deut. 12; 1 Kin. 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:2 living God.</span> The true object of the psalmist’s devotion is not the temple building itself but the God who revealed Himself there. Israel was often tempted to forget God and rely on the external trappings of religion (Jer. 7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page930" title="930" />sparrow . . . swallow.</span> Note the playful envy expressed by the psalmist. He is jealous of the birds who are able to build their homes near the altar. In this way, he expresses his deepest longings to be as close as possible to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:4 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1. Blessed are those who experience God’s presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">your house.</span> The temple, being the place of God’s appointment on earth, is like heaven on earth. From a NT perspective, this verse gives a glimpse of the unending happiness of heaven.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:5 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1. Blessed are those who find strength in God to experience His presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">whose strength is in you.</span> Their vitality in life is found in God’s power, not in their own.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">highways.</span> People living outside of Jerusalem made special trips to the temple to enjoy God’s presence in worship. The Songs of Ascents (Pss. 120–34) were probably used during these journeys (120:title).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:6 Valley of Baca.</span> The name of a valley otherwise unknown. There is a similar sounding Hebrew verb meaning “to weep.” Others identify the noun as a certain kind of tree that flourishes in dry places, such as the balsam or aspen. The context indicates that the valley is arid but transformed by the presence of the joyful pilgrims.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">early rain.</span> The reference to the early rains probably connects this psalm with pilgrimage to the Feast of Booths (see Zech. 14:16–19), which was celebrated in the fall with the onset of the rainy season.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:7 Zion.</span> The location of the temple, the ultimate goal of their pilgrimage. See notes on 2:6; 50:2; 74:2; 137:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:9 our shield . . . your anointed.</span> Shield is a metaphor for the king in his role as protector of his people. The king is not only the political leader of Israel but also the reflection of God’s kingship on earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:11 sun.</span> The metaphor comparing God to the sun praises Him as the source of light and energy. The burning rays of the sun in the dry country east of the Mediterranean make it a suitable portrayal of God’s power.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shield.</span> God is the ultimate source of protection.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">No good thing does he withhold.</span> See Rom. 8:28–39, esp. v. 32.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.84.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 84:12 blessed.</span> See note on 1:1. Blessed are those who trust in God to experience His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 85</span> Recalls the past when God’s people experienced His restoration (vv. 1–3) and the present when restoration is needed again (vv. 4–7). The promise of restoration and a word of exhortation follow (vv. 8, 9), along with a description of the restoration in terms of rain that will result in a bountiful harvest (vv. 10–13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:1–3</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page931" title="931" />These verses recount a past experience of restoration.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:1 favorable to your land.</span> A number of occasions in biblical history are illustrative for the psalm. Perhaps most appropriate, though the psalm could have already been in existence for many years, was Judah’s return from Babylonian captivity in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span></p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:2 forgave the iniquity.</span> The people’s misfortunes came from their sin before God. Forgiveness of sins means that God’s wrath will be stilled. The necessary repentance is also the gift of God’s grace.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:4–7</span> These verses recount a present need for restoration.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:4–7 Restore us again . . . revive us again.</span> Based on God’s restoration in the past, the psalmist prays for restoration in the present.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:8–9</span> These verses recount the promise of restoration and a word of exhortation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:8 me.</span> The community has been speaking as a unit up to this point (“us”), but now an individual steps forward. Whoever he is (priest or prophet), he speaks on behalf of God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">he will speak peace.</span> The word for “peace” (Heb. <span class="italic">shalom</span>) indicates health and wholeness, and, like “steadfast love” (v. 7), it is a word intimately associated with the covenant. God promises the restoration of intimate relationship with His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">saints.</span> Formed from the same root as “steadfast love” (v. 7) and denotes those who are the objects of God’s covenant love.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:10–13</span> These verses describe the promised restoration.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:10 meet . . . kiss each other.</span> This verse has long been interpreted to refer to the reconciliation that Jesus Christ effected between God’s justice, which cannot tolerate sin, and His mercy, which does not rejoice in the death of the wicked (Ezek. 33:11; 2 Pet. 3:9). Justice and mercy came together in the cross of Christ. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter04.xhtml#page172">The Holiness of God</a>” on p. 172.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">peace.</span> The well-known Heb. <span class="italic">shalom</span>, which denotes wholeness and health. (see v. 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:11 up from the ground . . . down from the sky.</span> The future restored relationship with God will join God’s blessing from heaven with the faithfulness of His people on earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:12 good.</span> In context, “good” refers to fall rains that start the agricultural year and enable a bountiful harvest; see 65:11.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">yield its increase.</span> Fertility of land in an arid climate is an indication of God’s care and love for His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.85.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 85:13 Righteousness will go before him.</span> This attribute of God is personified as a herald who proclaims God’s way before Him (cf. 23:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 86</span> A prayer for help in time of trouble concentrically arranged: save Your servant (vv. 1–4); God’s steadfast love (vv. 5, 6); trouble (v. 7); the nations will glorify God’s name (vv. 8–10); teach me to honor Your name (v. 11); the psalmist will glorify God’s name (vv. 12, 13); trouble (86:14); God’s steadfast love (v. 15); save Your servant (vv. 16, 17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:title</span> See note on Ps. 17.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:1–4</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page932" title="932" />These verses are a prayer for God to save His servant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:2 who trusts in you.</span> The psalmist recognizes his inability, but he knows where true strength lies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:3 Be gracious to me.</span> The poet knows that God’s answer to his prayer is a manifestation of God’s unmerited grace. God owes him nothing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:4 I lift up my soul.</span> An idiom for trusting in God; see 24:4; 25:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:5, 6</span> These verses focus on God’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:5 abounding in steadfast love.</span> A core confession; see, e.g., 103:8; also Ex. 34:6; Num. 14:18; Neh. 9:17; Ps. 103:8.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">call upon you.</span> God does not forgive all people indiscriminately; He waits until they turn to Him with prayers of repentance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:7</span> This verse focuses on the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:7 day of my trouble.</span> For this expression see 77:2.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:8–10</span> These verses promise that the nations will glorify God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:8 none like you.</span> The psalmist sees that no god of the surrounding nations can be compared with the Lord in what He is or does. This confession of God’s uniqueness is not a tacit admission that other gods exist (see v. 10). The psalmist is comparing the foreigners’ vain imaginations with the reality of Yahweh.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:9 All the nations you have made.</span> Yahweh is the God of all the nations, even though they may not recognize Him. God gives them their existence and whatever blessings they have.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:11</span> The center of the poem and a prayer for God to teach the psalmist to honor His name.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:11 unite my heart.</span> A united heart is one totally set on God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:12, 13</span> These verses promise that the psalmist will glorify God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:13 steadfast love.</span> The lovingkindness freely offered and promised in the gospel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">delivered my soul.</span> While it is possible that the psalmist is referring to a past deliverance, it is probable that the verb has a future reference, since vv. 1–7, 14–17 presume that the psalmist needs to be rescued. The statement would then be an affirmation of faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:14</span> This verse focuses on the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:14 they do not set you before them.</span> Something that the godly do; see 16:8; 54:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:15</span> This verse focuses on God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:15</span> See note on v. 5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:16, 17</span> These verses are a prayer for God to save His servant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.86.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 86:17 have helped . . . comforted.</span> See note on v. 13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 87</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page933" title="933" />The psalm glorifies Jerusalem as the city of God (vv. 1–3), which is the spiritual home of all the nations (vv. 4–7), and is similar to Pss. 46; 48; 76. The unique contribution of Ps. 87 is to give a glimpse of the universal character of God’s worship. Its universalistic language brings to mind the future day when the Gentiles should be “fellow heirs” in the gospel (Eph. 3:6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:1–3</span> These verses portray Jerusalem as the city of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:1 holy mount.</span> God is omnipresent: He is everywhere. Nevertheless, God met His people in an intimate and special way at Zion (2:6 note).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">he founded.</span> This refers to the building of the temple on Mount Zion, north of the city of David and towering over it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:2 loves . . . more than.</span> The point is not that God hated other parts of Israel but that He blessed Jerusalem with His presence. After the temple was built, there was only one designated place for the official worship of God—Jerusalem (Deut. 12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:3 of you are spoken.</span> Referring to the divine pronouncement to follow in the next few verses.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:4–7</span> These verses portray Jerusalem as the spiritual home of the nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:4 those who know me.</span> There were occasional foreigners, such as Rahab and Naaman, who worshiped the Lord during the OT period (cf. Ex. 12:38). This amazing verse looks forward to seeing entire foreign nations bowing down to God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">mention.</span> This formal introduction to the divine pronouncement uses the idea of the “book of the living” (69:28; cf. Ex. 32:32; Ps. 139:16; Is. 4:3; Rev. 21:24–27).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Rahab and Babylon.</span> Rahab is a name for Egypt (Is. 30:7). Egypt and Babylon were the two superpowers who continually fought against Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Philistia.</span> Israel’s traditional enemy on the Mediterranean coast west of Judah.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Tyre.</span> An affluent sea power north of Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Cush.</span> Biblical Cush is the remote region south of Egypt, including parts of modern Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Sudan.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:5 were born in her.</span> Refers metaphorically to a spiritual birth in Zion, which is the spiritual birth mother of peoples from all over the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:6 registers the peoples.</span> See note on v. 4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.87.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 87:7 my springs.</span> Physical thirst stands for spiritual thirst (42:1, 2), which can only be satisfied in Jerusalem, God’s chosen place.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 88</span> Of all the laments in the Psalter, this psalm most vividly expresses the distress of the psalmist. The writer’s distress can be heard from beginning to end, because his pain has lasted from his youth (v. 15) until the present. Most laments turn to confidence and praise at the end, but in this one the only glimmer of hope is that the psalmist is concerned to pray at all. He refers to God as “my salvation” (v. 1). A Christian is not, as such, free from the suffering of this world. On the contrary, the Christian lot commonly is suffering and pain but the believer finds solace in the suffering and resurrection of Christ (Phil. 3:10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:3 Sheol.</span> See note on 6:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page934" title="934" />set loose among the dead.</span> His condition is so bad that people treat him as if he were already dead.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:8 horror.</span> The psalmist’s unhappiness is reminiscent of the suffering of Job.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:9 spread out my hands.</span> An attitude of prayer. Though God afflicts him, or perhaps because God afflicts him, the psalmist knows there is only one refuge for him—God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:10 work wonders for the dead.</span> See 6:5; 30:9; and notes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:14 hide your face.</span> See 13:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:17 like a flood.</span> For water as a figure of trouble, see notes on 18:4, 15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.88.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 88:18 my companions have become darkness.</span> His closest friends have abandoned him (v. 8), and God is distant (v. 14), leaving only darkness nearby. This is the only psalm that ends on such a downcast note (Ps. 88 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 89</span> The psalm opens joyfully but turns to lament. It opens with confidence in God’s steadfast love and faithfulness (vv. 1–37) and closes with doubts about God’s steadfast love and faithfulness (vv. 38–51). The issue at the heart of the psalm is the Davidic covenant. In 2 Sam. 7:4–17 (cf. 1 Chr. 17:1–15) God established a covenant with David in which He promised that the special relationship would pass on to David’s obedient sons God’s language was bold; He promised that the covenant would last “forever” (2 Sam. 7:13). But this promise was not without conditions upon the recipients. If they sinned, they would be punished (1 Kin. 8:25; 2 Sam. 7:14). David’s son Solomon began his slide into apostasy by admitting the religious cults of his foreign wives (1 Kin. 11). The continuing disobedience of the Davidic kings resulted in the Babylonian exile and an end to that period of Israel’s monarchy in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> But the substance of the promise was not canceled; Christ came to take the throne of David forever (Is. 9:7; Luke 1:32; 22:30).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:1–37</span> These verses express confidence in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:1 steadfast love.</span> The wonders of God’s devotion to His people in the love of His covenant with them.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">faithfulness.</span> God is not fickle or capricious but will keep the promises He makes. Hope in the fulfillment of God’s promise to David is what will motivate the lament at the end of the psalm (vv. 38–51).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page935" title="935" />heavens.</span> The heavens are personified; the reference is to the beings in heaven, such as the cherubim and the angels. God is so great that even these powerful spiritual entities fall to their knees in adoration.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">assembly.</span> The angels and other spiritual beings in heaven are God’s divine assembly through whom He works His will.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:6 in the skies.</span> Having mentioned spiritual beings, the psalmist is quick to point out the uniqueness of God. The writings of the Canaanites and Mesopotamians also mention an “assembly of the holy ones,” but that was an assembly made up of different gods. The God of Israel is not the best of such gods but wholly different from them. The OT expresses His transcendence in numerous places (Is. 44:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:10 Rahab.</span> Like Leviathan, Rahab is a sea monster of Near Eastern mythology, standing for forces of evil and chaos (Job 9:13; Ezek. 29:3 and note). Frequently the name Rahab is applied to Egypt (87:4 and note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:11 you have founded them.</span> Unlike the heathen gods, the Lord is the creator of the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:12 Tabor and Hermon.</span> Hermon in the far north is the highest peak in Israel. Tabor is a mountain of distinctive shape standing in the Megiddo plain, a landmark of the boundary of three tribes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:14 Righteousness and justice.</span> As king, God is responsible for the administration of law in the land. He does not judge arbitrarily.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">go before you.</span> See 85:13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:17 our horn.</span> The king. The metaphor of the horn is associated with that of the bull, which stands for strength. God is the one who endows the human king with power. This thought is specified in the next line.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:19 in a vision.</span> The exact words of this vision are not found elsewhere in Scripture, but the allusion is probably to the prophetic insight of Nathan in 2 Sam. 7, if not to the initial divine word given to Samuel concerning David’s kingship (1 Sam. 16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:21 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page936" title="936" />shall strengthen him.</span> The king had sacred responsibilities, both political and religious. God promises to give David the strength he needs to carry out his divinely given tasks.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:24 faithfulness . . . steadfast love.</span> These two key words reverberate throughout the psalm, beginning in v. 1 (v. 1 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:26 my Father.</span> A reference to the intimate relationship established between God and David in 2 Sam. 7:14 (see Ps. 2:7). The king played an important role as mediator of the Davidic covenant between God and His people. This special function made the apostasy of later kings especially heinous.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:27 firstborn.</span> Calling David the “firstborn” means that he was first in rank in the covenant community, the head of a household (Gen. 4:4; 25:31 and notes). David in particular foreshadows Christ, uniquely the Son of God by nature and head of the church (Eph. 1:22; Heb. 3:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:29 forever.</span> The dynasty of David as an earthly political enterprise was long-lived but not eternal. It fell because of the sins of David’s successors. Superseding it, as the reality casting a shadow, is the eternal kingdom of Jesus Christ.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:31 my statutes.</span> God’s will as summarized in the first five books of the OT. Deut. 17:19 commands the king to be well versed in God’s law and obedient to it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.34"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:34 will not violate.</span> God’s promises stand forever. The Davidic covenant has a conditional element, as this psalm points out in v. 32, but its ultimate fulfillment does not depend on human response. David and the psalmist knew that it would be fulfilled but could not know everything about how that would occur (Acts 2:29–31; 1 Pet. 1:10, 11).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:38–51</span> These verses express confidence that God can deliver the king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.38"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:38 But now.</span> Signals the start of the new, contrasting section.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you have cast off.</span> The focus of the psalm shifts to the present and the great rift in the relationship between God and the king.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">your anointed.</span> An unspecified Davidic successor to the throne.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.39"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:39 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page937" title="937" />renounced.</span> The psalmist is outspoken, speaking boldly in his appeal to break God’s silence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.41"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:41 All . . . plunder him.</span> God’s absence is experienced through the victory of their enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.49"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:49 where is your steadfast love of old.</span> The most poignant line in the poem. The psalmist agonizes over the seeming absence of God’s love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.89.52"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 89:52</span> A doxology that concludes Book 3 (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes). The doxology in all likelihood is an independent poem.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Blessed be.</span> God is blessed in response to all the blessings He has granted in Pss. 73–89.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 90</span> This psalm, the only one ascribed to Moses, affirms that the absence of the Davidic king (Ps. 89) does not mean the absence of God or His steadfast love. God Himself always has been and always will be “our dwelling place” (v. 1). The poem has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): an affirmation of faith in the Lord as the eternal refuge of His people (vv. 1, 2); a lament for the pain and trouble of human existence (vv. 3–11); and a concluding series of requests (vv. 12–17), at the heart of which is “Satisfy us in the morning with your steadfast love that we may rejoice and be glad all our days” (v. 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:1, 2</span> These verses are an affirmation of faith in the Lord as the eternal refuge of His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:1 you have been our dwelling place.</span> The psalmist begins by affirming the truth that God Himself, not the Davidic king, is the ground of hope.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:2 from everlasting to everlasting.</span> The psalmist affirms the eternal existence of God. God’s work of creation (Gen. 1) brought the whole universe into existence; God Himself had always been there. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page938">The Self-Existence of God</a>” on next page.</p>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page938" title="938" />
      <aside>
        <p epub:type="bridgehead">THE SELF-EXISTENCE OF GOD</p>
        <p class="noind">When the Bible declares that God is the Creator of the universe it indicates that God Himself is not created. There is a crucial distinction between the Creator and the creation. The creation bears the stamp of the Creator and witnesses to His glory. But the creation is never to be worshiped. It is not Supreme.</p>
        <p>It is impossible for something to create itself. The concept of self-creation is a contradiction in terms, a nonsense statement. I ask the reader to pause and reflect a bit. Nothing can be self-created. Not even God can make Himself. For God to create Himself He would have to be before He is. Even God can’t do that.</p>
        <p>Every <span class="italic">effect</span> must have a <span class="italic">cause.</span> That is true by definition. But God is not an effect. He has no beginning and therefore no antecedent cause. He is eternal. He always was or is. He has, within Himself, the power of being. He requires no assistance from outside sources to continue to exist. This is what is meant by the idea of <span class="italic">self-existent.</span> Granted, it is a lofty and awesome concept. We know of nothing else quite like it. Everything we perceive in our frame of reference is dependent and creaturely. We can’t fully comprehend anything as self-existent.</p>
        <p>But just because it is impossible (by definition) that a creature be self-existent does not mean it is impossible for the Creator to be self-existent. God, like us, cannot be self-created. But God, unlike us, can be self-existent. Indeed, this is the very essence of the difference between the Creator and creation. This is what makes Him the Supreme Being and the <span class="italic">source</span> of all other beings.</p>
        <p>The concept of self-existence violates no law of reason, logic, or science. It is a rationally valid notion. By contrast, the concept of self-creation violates the most basic law of reason, logic, and science—the law of noncontradiction. Self-existence is rational; self-creation is irrational.</p>
        <p>The notion of something being self-existent is not only rationally <span class="italic">possible,</span> it is rationally <span class="italic">necessary.</span> Again, reason demands that if anything is, then something must have, within itself, the power of being. Otherwise there would be nothing. Unless something existed in itself, nothing could possibly exist at all.</p>
        <p>Perhaps the oldest and deepest question of all is, why is there something rather than nothing? A necessary answer to at least part of the question is because God exists. God exists in Himself eternally. He is the source and fountainhead of all being. He alone has, within Himself, the power of being. Paul declares our dependence upon the power of God’s being for our own existence when he says: “In Him we live and move and have our being” (Acts 17:28).</p>
      </aside>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:3–11</span> These verses lament the pain and trouble of human existence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:3 to dust.</span> God’s judgment returns the descendants of Adam to the dust in death.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:4 as yesterday.</span> God is not subject to time but is its creator.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:5</span> The brevity of human life is likened to a dream, highlighting the contrast of finite lives with God’s eternity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:8 our secret sins.</span> People commit sins they think they can hide, such as envy, hatred, and lust. But before God there are no secrets (Heb. 4:12, 13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:10 seventy.</span> To a young person, seventy years seems like a long time. But before God’s eternity and in human retrospect, it is brief.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">toil and trouble.</span> A touch of hyperbole to underscore the human condition, since not all the days of all humans are “toil and trouble” (cf. 16:2; 51:4; 73:25 notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:11 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page939" title="939" />Who considers.</span> Only Jesus Christ, who drank the full cup of God’s wrath for sinners, knows the full power of death.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:12–17</span> These verses offer up a series of requests.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:13 How long.</span> See note on 6:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:14 in the morning.</span> See 30:5 for the hope of restoration “in the morning.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:15 evil.</span> Not moral evil, but trouble, affliction, or calamity; see 27:5; 34:19; 35:26.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:16 your work.</span> God must act to redeem and restore.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">their children.</span> Moses contemplates a generation entering the Promised Land.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.90.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 90:17 favor of the Lord our God.</span> In the midst of life in the wilderness, only the blessing of God’s presence can give meaning and joy.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">establish the work of our hands.</span> Wanderers in the wilderness may leave no monuments, but God can give eternal significance to the deeds of hands that serve Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 91</span> A refuge psalm that provides God’s people “through all the generations” (90:1) with an antidote to fears and anxiety. There are three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): an affirmation that God is our refuge (vv. 1, 2), a description of how the Lord is our refuge (vv. 3–13), and a confirmation by God Himself that He is, in fact, our refuge (vv. 14–16).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:1, 2</span> These verses are an affirmation that God is our refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:1 He who dwells . . . will abide.</span> States the theme of the whole psalm. Those who draw near to God can have peace in Him no matter how difficult their circumstances.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:3–13</span> These verses are a description of how the Lord is our refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:3 he will deliver you.</span> God is present and able to deliver His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:4 with his pinions.</span> Psalms of confidence often have a metaphor for God’s compassion at their core. God is likened to a mother bird who protects her young.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his faithfulness.</span> God’s steadfast love and the certainty that He will keep His promises sustain the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:5 terror of the night.</span> Perhaps a reference to plagues that could sweep through an encampment.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">arrow.</span> The literal setting of battle can be taken figuratively for the struggles of life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:10 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page940" title="940" />evil.</span> See note on 90:15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:11, 12 his angels.</span> God often works His will through His spiritual attendants, the angels.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:12 they will bear you up.</span> Satan quoted this passage to Jesus in the wilderness (Matt. 4:6), tempting Him to jump from the top of the temple. Satan’s aim was to turn faith into presumption.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:14–16</span> These verses are a confirmation by God Himself that He is, in fact, our refuge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:14 holds fast to me in love.</span> God’s promise of protection comes to those who have faith in Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.91.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 91:16 long life.</span> See, e.g., Deut. 6:2 and Prov. 3:1, 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 92</span> A hymn that has the exaltation of the Lord at its heart (v. 8). This central verse is preceded by seven lines with fifty-two words that praise God (vv. 1–4) and affirm the fleeting nature of the prosperity of the wicked (vv. 5–7), and it is followed by seven lines with fifty-two words that affirm the downfall of the wicked (vv. 9–11) and the ultimate prosperity of the godly, who praise God (vv. 12–15).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:1–4</span> These verses focus on the praise of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:1 Most High.</span> This title is similar to one commonly given to Baal in Canaanite religious texts. Applying it to the God of Israel is a kind of taunt directed toward anyone tempted to worship Baal (83:18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:2 steadfast love . . . faithfulness.</span> In His covenant with His people, God pledges to love them faithfully. He is the author of the terms of the covenant that bind Him and His people together (136:1 and note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:4 your work . . . the works of your hands.</span> The psalmist concentrates on God’s acts in time and space. God is not out of touch with created reality but works through such reality to demonstrate His love for His people.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:5–7</span> These verses teach the fleeting nature of the prosperity of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:5 How great . . . thoughts are very deep.</span> The contemplation of God’s acts and thoughts are overwhelming. They lead to reverent fascination and humble devotion.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:7 the wicked sprout like grass.</span> The psalmist does not deny that the wicked appear to prosper in this world.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">doomed to destruction forever.</span> The prosperity of the wicked is short-lived; see 37:2; 73:18–20.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:8</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page941" title="941" />The heart of the poem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:8 but you, O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">, are on high forever.</span> In contrast to the fleeting prosperity of the wicked is the eternal exaltation of God. Those who are truly prosperous will enjoy a prosperity that is as eternal as God’s exaltation (v. 14).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:9–11</span> These verses affirm the downfall of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:9 your enemies shall perish.</span> As the psalmist meditates on the greatness and justice of God, he comes to the sure conclusion that the wicked will be destroyed.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:10 exalted my horn.</span> The horn of an animal is used in the Bible as a symbol of power. The wild ox raises its horn with pride and confidence. Cf. 75:4; 89:17; 132:17; 148:14 and notes.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:12–15</span> These verses focus on the praise of God for the ultimate prosperity of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:12 palm tree . . . cedar.</span> A strong contrast is drawn between the flourishing of the righteous and the destruction of the wicked (v. 7). The wicked are like fragile grass, whereas the righteous are strong, vital, and productive trees. A similar contrast is found in Ps. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:13 planted in the house of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The source of the vitality of the righteous is not themselves but God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.92.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 92:14 old age.</span> The horizon of the ancient poets was often limited to this life, but the NT extends that horizon into eternity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.93.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 93</span> This short poem stands at the head of a group of psalms that praise God as king (93; 95–100). Cf. Pss. 24; 46.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.93.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 93:1 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">reigns.</span> This phrase and its slight variants may be found throughout this section of the Psalter (96:10; 97:1; 98:6; 99:1). God is king, with omnipotent power and sovereign control over the world.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the world is established.</span> This word of assurance is based on the fact that the King has created and maintains the world. The forces of evil, disorder, and chaos (vv. 3, 4) will not overwhelm the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.93.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 93:2 from everlasting.</span> God has no beginning; He is uncreated. This conception of the eternal kingship of God stands in stark contrast with the theology of Mesopotamia and Canaan. In these neighboring regions, the power of the gods varied according to changes in the political arena.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.93.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 93:3 floods.</span> An ancient symbol of the forces of chaos and evil. See notes on 18:4, 15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.93.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 93:5 Your decrees.</span> The stability and order that exists because of God’s eternal kingship is shared with humanity through the revealed law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 94</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page942" title="942" />The psalm provides us with five perspectives for dealing with oppression and injustice.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:1–7</span> Shows that vengeance belongs to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:1 God of vengeance.</span> See Deut. 32:35; Rom. 12:19; Heb. 10:30.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:2 Rise up, O judge.</span> See notes on 3:7 and 7:6; theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter04.xhtml#page172">The Holiness of God</a>” on p. 172.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:3 how long.</span> See note on 6:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:4 arrogant words.</span> They should be ashamed and silent, but instead they shout their evil accomplishments from the rooftops.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:6 widow . . . sojourner . . . fatherless.</span> See note on 9:18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:7 does not see.</span> The wicked in their prosperity believe that God does not care what they do.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:8–11</span> Teaches that God knows what is happening when there is oppression and injustice.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:8 be wise.</span> The wicked will be wise when they shed the illusion that God does not know their evil schemes or that He is unable to do anything about them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:11 knows the thoughts of man.</span> The Lord knows even the secret thoughts hidden away in the heart (90:8).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:12–15</span> Shows that true happiness is available even in the midst of injustice and oppression.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:12 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:13 until a pit is dug.</span> The psalmist recognizes that there is often a delay between a wicked act and its punishment. The unrighteous may prosper for a time. However, that they will pay for their crimes is a certainty.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:14 will not forsake his people.</span> God may discipline the righteous (v. 12) to return them to conformity to His will, but He will never leave them.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:16–19</span> Shows that the Lord can be looked to for protection from the wicked in times of injustice and oppression.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:16 for me.</span> The psalm takes on a personal note as the author prepares to mention how God delivered him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:18 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page943" title="943" />your steadfast love.</span> Specifically, God’s love for those in covenant with Him.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:20–23</span> Shows that people reap what they sow.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:20 wicked rulers.</span> A king who perverts justice. A king of Israel was to reflect the kingship of God, particularly God’s justice and compassion. The psalmist refers to an Israelite king who did not seek the will of God. There are many such examples from the history of the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.94.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 94:23 bring back on them their iniquity.</span> See Prov. 1:18 for the principle that one reaps what one sows.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 95</span> The psalm calls believers to respond in two ways to God, who is creator and king.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:1–7a</span> Calls for worship of God as creator and king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:1 let us.</span> A worship leader, such as a priest, calls on the congregation to worship the Lord together with him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:3 great King above all gods.</span> As the supreme God of the universe, all sovereignty is His. The reference is to popular Near Eastern mythology, not the actual existence of such gods (48:2; 74:13 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:4 In his hand.</span> In His power.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:5 sea . . . dry land.</span> As in v. 4, complementary terms are used to indicate the whole earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:6 Maker.</span> Our Creator is our redeemer, and “maker” refers in this context to God’s act of redemption whereby He “made/created” a people for Himself and became their King. See also Is. 54:5; Hos. 8:13, 14.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:9b–11</span> Calls for submission to God, who is creator and king.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:7 Today.</span> An ever-present day.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:8 Meribah . . . Massah.</span> These place names may be translated “quarreling” and “testing.” They sum up Israel’s attitude toward God during the forty years of wandering in the wilderness. For the history see Ex. 17:1–7 and notes; Num. 20:1–13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.95.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 95:11 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page944" title="944" />shall not enter my rest.</span> Those who rebelled against the Lord in the wilderness never entered the Promised Land. Heb. 3:7—4:7 cites this passage and applies it to the Christian’s life. Professing Christians must heed God’s Word, or they will not enter God’s eternal rest.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 96</span> The psalmist calls on all nations to proclaim God as their king. The psalm contrasts God with the lifeless idols of the nations (vv. 4–6). The theme of God’s universal kingship is similar to that seen in Ps. 47; 93; 97; 99; and particularly Ps. 98. 1 Chr. 16:8–36 records the thanksgiving song of David when he brought the ark to Jerusalem, a song composed from Pss. 96; 105. See esp. 1 Chr. 16:23–33 for Ps. 96. The intensity of the psalm builds over three strophes (vv. 1–6, 7–10, and 11–13; see Introduction to Hebrew Poetry).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:1–6</span> These verses call us to sing to the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:1 new song.</span> See note on 33:3.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">all the earth.</span> Since God is king of the whole earth, not merely of Israel, the writer calls on all His subjects to praise Him. It is not until Christ returns that substantial numbers from the nations join in the universal chorus of praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:3 his marvelous works.</span> God’s acts in history provide marvelous events for which to praise Him, e.g., He “made the heavens” (v. 5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:4 great is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> A standard affirmation in worship (35:27; 40:16; 48:1; 145:3).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">feared above all gods.</span> That the Lord is “to be feared above all gods” (v. 4) is not an affirmation of polytheism but a denial of it (see 95:3; 115:4).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:6 Splendor and majesty.</span> See note on 8:5.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">strength.</span> See 93:1.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:7–10</span> These verses call us to sing to the Lord as King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:8 offering.</span> See Lev. 2. The word is also used for the tribute due a king (2 Kin. 17:4).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:10 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">reigns.</span> The psalmist proclaims God’s kingship among the nations.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shall never be moved.</span> For this image of the earth as unshakable from the time of creation onward, see 93:1; 104:5.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">judge . . . with equity.</span> God does not rule according to whim but according to justice and righteousness. As there is stability in creation, so there is stability in justice.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:11–13</span> These verses call us to sing to the Lord as the judge of the earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:11 heavens be glad . . . earth rejoice.</span> This verse and the one that follows personify the whole creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.96.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 96:13 comes to judge.</span> The sense is that He comes to put everything back into proper order, which is why the creation is rejoicing in vv. 11, 12.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 97</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page945" title="945" />Verses 1–6 describe the King when He appears in His world; vv. 7–9 describe various reactions to the Lord’s appearance; vv. 10–12 teach those who love God how to respond to His appearance and reign.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:1–6</span> These verses describe the appearance of the King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:1 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">reigns.</span> For God as king, see note on 93:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the earth.</span> The psalm calls on all the earth to praise God. This call to the nations has taken on a whole new meaning after the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:2, 3 Clouds . . . darkness . . . Fire.</span> See Pss. 18; 29. The visible revelation of God (i.e., in theophany) was sometimes in the context of a storm-like event. Such a manifestation helped God’s people to appreciate His awesome power.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:5 mountains.</span> See note on 46:2, 3.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:7–9</span> These verses describe various responses to the King’s appearance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:7 shame.</span> The response of those who do not honor the King is shame at His appearance.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">who make their boast . . . idols.</span> See 96:4–6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:8 because of your judgments.</span> The people of God know that the judgments of God will remove the wicked and so bring about their liberation.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:10–12</span> These verses teach the righteous how to respond to the King.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:10 hate evil.</span> Evil is that which is out of accord with the King’s ways and is not to be chosen as a way of life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.97.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 97:12 Rejoice . . . give thanks.</span> As the earth is to rejoice in the King (v. 1), so are His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 98</span> A royal psalm, like Pss. 47; 93; 95; 96; 97; 99. The theme of deliverance is divided into past (vv. 1–3), present (vv. 4–6), and future (vv. 7–9).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:1–3</span> These verses focus on celebrating the King’s reign in the past.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:1 new song.</span> See note on 96:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">marvelous things.</span> Translated “wonderful deeds” in 9:1 (9:1 note).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">worked salvation.</span> In its OT context the reference is to a military victory. It is appropriate today to apply the verse to a spiritual victory, since it is a great victory by God over “the cosmic powers” (Eph. 6:12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page946" title="946" />remembered.</span> More than mere memory, God’s remembrance includes His favorable action.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:4–6</span> These verses focus on celebrating the King’s reign in the present.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:4 a joyful noise.</span> This section demonstrates the enthusiastic worship of a people who have deep love for God. Their worship is active and noisy.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:7–9</span> These verses focus on celebrating the King’s reign in the future.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:7 sea.</span> Nature is here personified as praising the Lord (96:11, 12). He is creator of all, animate and inanimate (95:5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:8 rivers . . . hills.</span> See notes on v. 7; 46:2, 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.98.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 98:9 judge . . . with equity.</span> See note on 96:13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 99</span> A royal psalm (Ps. 93 note). “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> reigns” is the governing theme of the psalm, and the threefold use of “holy” (vv. 3, 5, 9) shows that holiness of the King is the focus of praise. There is an obvious strophic break at the end of v. 5, and vv. 6–9 are tied together by the repetition of the idea that God “answered” His people in vv. 6, 8.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:1–5</span> These verses call us to praise the holy King, who reigns.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:1 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">reigns.</span> See notes on 5:2 and 93:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">cherubim.</span> Cherubim are spiritual beings who dwell in heaven with God. They are guardians of God’s holiness, as witnessed by their role in protecting the post-fall garden (Gen. 3:24). Cherubim were symbolically represented in the tabernacle, both in the innermost curtain (Ex. 36:35), and in the Most Holy Place (Ex. 37:1–9). Later, Solomon added cherubs made of wood overlaid with gold in both the Most Holy Place and the inner sanctuary (1 Kin. 6; 2 Chr. 3). The psalm refers to the cherubim of God’s throne with their outstretched wings above the ark of the covenant.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">let the earth quake.</span> At God’s special self-revelations (theophanies), reverberations like those of a natural earthquake were sometimes felt throughout the earth. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter14.xhtml#page630">The Incomprehensibility of God</a>” on p. 630.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:2 in Zion.</span> The location of the temple. See note on 3:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:3 name.</span> See note on 8:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Holy is he.</span> God is set apart from all His creatures, which is evident from His uncreated nature, His power, and His moral perfection.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:4 executed justice.</span> See note on 96:10.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:6–9</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page947" title="947" />These verses call us to praise the holy King, who responds.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:6 Moses . . . Aaron . . . Samuel.</span> Three of the most prominent leaders of Israel in the period before the monarchy. All three served as mediators between God and His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">called upon his name.</span> The emphasis in this section is that God speaks to His people when they turn to Him for help in prayer.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">he answered them.</span> God responds to His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:7 pillar of the cloud.</span> See Ex. 13:21, 22; 40:34–38.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:8 you answered them.</span> God responds to His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">avenger of their wrongdoings.</span> For their own good, and to preserve His holiness, God may punish His people for the sins they commit. Israel knew this, because God gave foreign enemies power over them when they persisted in unbelief. This reflects God’s corrective punishment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.99.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 99:9 God is holy.</span> See note on v. 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 100</span> This psalm brings the celebration of the Lord’s kingship in Pss. 93–100 to a conclusion, calling on “all the earth” (v. 1) to worship Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 100:1 all the earth.</span> As in the preceding royal psalms, the call goes out beyond the chosen people to all the peoples of the earth. God is their king too, regardless of whether they are aware of it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 100:2 gladness.</span> God is not a despotic king who forces His people to serve Him. Loving service is a grateful response to the grace of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 100:3 sheep of his pasture.</span> See note on 23:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 100:4 gates . . . courts.</span> Those of the temple. This psalm may have been sung during a festive entry into the temple precincts.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.100.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 100:5 his steadfast love.</span> God’s lovingkindness to people in covenant with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.101.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 101</span> In this psalm the king promises to live a life of obedience, pursuing holiness and seeking to root out evil from his kingdom. David could not live up to his ideals. He failed time after time, though he lived a life of repentance. Many believe that Ps. 101 was written by David and later used as a coronation psalm, beginning with Solomon. If so, high ideals at the beginning of his reign degenerated into disobedience and, in the case of Solomon, open apostasy. Christ alone could offer perfect obedience in the flesh.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.101.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 101:1 justice.</span> The reference is to God’s judgments. The psalmist praises the Lord for them because they are consistent and righteous, not arbitrary.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.101.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 101:2 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page948" title="948" />way that is blameless.</span> As defined by the law of God. See Mic. 6:8 for the classic description.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.101.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 101:3 I hate.</span> The psalmist strongly repudiates wicked deeds. He will not tolerate them in his presence. In this he seeks to emulate God, who will not tolerate an unrepentant sinner in His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.101.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 101:5 will destroy . . . will not endure.</span> The psalmist will actively oppose unrighteousness in his area of authority.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">haughty look . . . arrogant heart.</span> The heart is the foundation of a person’s being and character. The “look” refers to demeanor. See 131:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:title</span> The title is unusual in that it does not give a specific historical occasion but the situation (affliction) in which the psalm finds appropriate use. The title also teaches us the best way of working through feelings of being overwhelmed by trouble. The psalm has three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): Pour out your complaint before the Lord (vv. 1–11), put your focus on the Lord (vv. 12–22), and pray with confidence to the Lord (vv. 23–28).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:1–11</span> These verses show how to pour out complaint before the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:2 hide your face.</span> The psalmist wonders at the withdrawal of God’s friendship. He knows it is a sign of God’s wrath, since God promised to be with His obedient covenant people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:3 like a furnace.</span> Points to the pain and suffering of life in general and the pain of a raging fever in particular.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page949" title="949" />bones cling to my flesh.</span> His suffering is not only spiritual and psychological but also physical.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:6 like a desert owl of the wilderness.</span> He is silent in his affliction and without friends or supporters.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:8 enemies.</span> As is typical in a lament, unnamed but real enemies are a source of distress to the psalmist. Because the enemies are unnamed, the psalm has timeless application to all generations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:10 your indignation and anger.</span> The psalmist knows the ultimate cause of his suffering: God’s anger. He never disputes the justice of that anger, but he turns to God for relief.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:12–22</span> These verses show how to put one’s focus on the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:12 forever.</span> Over against the fragility of the psalmist’s life stands the constancy and eternity of the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:13 arise.</span> See notes on 3:7 and 7:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zion.</span> See 2:6; 3:3. The references to the destruction of Zion have led many commentators to place the psalm just after the Babylonian captivity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:15 Nations will fear.</span> As Jerusalem rises up from destruction, all who see it will praise the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:20 to hear . . . to set free.</span> Though God is above heaven, He enters the world to help the afflicted (9:18; 72:4 and notes).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:23–28</span> These verses show us how to pray with confidence to the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:23 shortened my days.</span> Through the sickness that now threatens the psalmist’s life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:25 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page950" title="950" />Of old.</span> God existed before His work of creation. The author of Hebrews applies vv. 25–27 to Christ (Heb. 1:10–12). There the argument is that however great the angels are considered, they are created and not eternal. But Christ, the second person of the Trinity, exists through all eternity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:27 you are the same.</span> See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page938">The Self-Existence of God</a>” on p. 938.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.102.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 102:28 children of your servants.</span> The poet’s hope is with the future generations. Though he suffers now in the present, he sees a brighter future.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 103</span> The first of four psalms of praise and thanksgiving that bring Book 4 to a close. This psalm begins and ends with invitations to praise God (vv. 1, 2, 20–22), which surround the actual praise of God (vv. 3–19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:1, 2</span> Calls the psalmist himself to praise God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:1 Bless.</span> Believers bless God because He has blessed them; that is, they praise God because He has empowered them to live an abundant life in His presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">O my soul.</span> The psalmist carries on a public dialogue with himself. He encourages himself to praise and so encourages others who see his example.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:3–19</span> These verses contain the praise of God called for in vv. 1, 2, 20–22.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:3 forgives all your iniquity.</span> The primary benefit of grace is the forgiveness of sins (Acts 13:38). God is compassionate toward His repentant people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">heals all your diseases.</span> God’s saving benefits are for the body as well as the soul.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:4 from the pit.</span> That is, from death.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> See note on 92:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:5 good.</span> God provides everything that is constructive and wholesome for His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:6 all who are oppressed.</span> See note on 102:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:7 Moses.</span> By referring to Moses, the psalmist calls to mind all of God’s blessings associated with the exodus, the wilderness wanderings, and even the conquest of the Promised Land.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:12 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page951" title="951" />as far as the east is from the west.</span> When God forgives sins, He completely removes them. The height and breadth of His mercy are vast.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:13 As a father.</span> The comparison of God to a compassionate and loving father is developed in Rom. 8:12–17. See Ex. 4:22, 23; Hos. 11:1, 8, 9.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:14 he knows.</span> God knows people better than they know themselves.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">we are dust.</span> According to Gen. 2:7, God formed Adam from the dust of the ground. The consequence of sin is that humans die as surely as the animals (Eccl. 3:19). Yet God has mercy on us. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter45.xhtml#page1948">Human Beings as Body and Soul</a>” on p. 1948.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:17 steadfast love . . . on those who fear him.</span> There is a reciprocal relationship between divine initiative and human response. God first loves His people, then they love Him in return as shown in the faithful obedience of their lives (Rom. 5:8; 1 John 4:10–12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:18 those who keep his covenant.</span> The obedience of those who keep God’s covenant shows the reality of His mercy. They walk in devoted fellowship with the Lord, who loves them in His covenant of grace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:19 rules over all.</span> See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter21.xhtml#page1045">Providence</a>” on p. 1045.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:20–22</span> Calls the angels to join in the praise of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:20 Bless.</span> See note on v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:21 hosts.</span> A reference to the divine army, which includes the angels, the cherubim, and other heavenly creatures.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.103.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 103:22 Bless.</span> The final line forms an inclusion with the opening line.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 104</span> The psalm is a creation hymn of matchless beauty. The psalm opens with praise for the majesty of God, who is the kingly creator (vv. 1, 2a). Two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) follow with praise for the stability of the universe God has made (vv. 2b–9) and for God’s abundant provision in the world (vv. 10–30). The psalm concludes with praise and prayer for the Creator’s glory (vv. 31–35).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:1, 2a</span> These verses praise God for His majesty as the kingly Creator.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:1 O my soul.</span> See note on 103:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">clothed.</span> This section develops the metaphor of the creation as God’s garment. This emphasizes the distinction between the Creator and the creation and implicitly disparages worship of any aspect of the creation, however glorious it may seem (cf. Rom. 1:22–25).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">splendor and majesty.</span> See note on 8:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:2 light.</span> A reference to the first day of creation (Gen. 1:3).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:2b–9</span> These verses praise God for the stability of the universe He has made.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">heavens.</span> A reference to the second day of creation (Gen. 1:6–8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page952" title="952" />wings of the wind.</span> See 18:9 and note.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:4 flaming fire.</span> God’s heavenly servants have an awesome appearance. How much more powerful must God, their creator, be. This verse may be a polemic against Baal worship, since Canaanite mythological texts describe the servants of their god as flames of fire.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:5 should never be moved.</span> The world is stable and ordered, not chaotic. God’s control of the world is comforting to those who recognize it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:6 waters.</span> God created the waters and ordered them in rivers, lakes, and oceans. In the religions of the surrounding nations, the sea is a symbol of chaos and disorder. Their pantheistic theology deifies the sea and sets it against the gods of order. The Bible uses this imagery but disallows the polytheistic theology (18:4; 46:2, 3; 74:13–15; Nah. 1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:7 At your rebuke.</span> The Greek word used in the Septuagint for “rebuke” is also used in Matt. 8:26 when Jesus rebuked the sea, demonstrating that He is the Creator.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:9 might not again cover.</span> The flood was thus an act of de-creation.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:10–30</span> These verses praise God for His abundant provision in the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:10 springs.</span> God provides water from the terrestrial sources in the form of springs and streams; see the waters below the firmament in Gen. 1:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:13 From your lofty abode.</span> The words “lofty abode” translate the same Hebrew word translated “chambers” in v. 3. God provides water from celestial sources in the form of rain; see the waters above the firmament in Gen. 1:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:14 You cause the grass to grow.</span> A reflection of the third day of creation (Gen. 1:9–13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:14, 15 food . . . wine . . . oil.</span> God’s kindness is exhibited in His provisions for daily life (Acts 14:17; 1 Tim. 4:3, 4). “Food” refers to grain, wine comes from grapes, and oil from olives. This triad stands for a whole year’s agricultural produce and is in this order owing to the order of harvesting; see, e.g., Deut. 7:13; 11:14; 14:23; 18:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:19 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page953" title="953" />moon . . . sun.</span> A reference to the fourth day of creation (Gen. 1:14–19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:21 from God.</span> What appears to be purely natural—lions seeking their prey—is an act of providence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:23 Man goes out.</span> God has given His creation a wonderfully ordered rhythm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:24 In wisdom.</span> See notes on Prov. 8:22–31. The divine answer to Job (Job 38–41) contains many examples of God’s wisdom in creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:25 sea . . . creatures innumerable.</span> The fifth day of creation (Gen. 1:20–23).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:26 ships . . . Leviathan.</span> The psalmist’s imagination is caught up with God’s mysterious sea. On its surface ships glide to and fro from distant ports, while underneath lurks the monster Leviathan, here a poetic symbol of God’s creative power (Job 41).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:29 hide your face.</span> God is omnipresent, i.e., everywhere (Ps. 139). However, in His anger God withdraws covenant blessings, and this is experienced as divine absence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.30"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:30 your Spirit.</span> Better “wind,” referring to the west wind that carries the rain that renews the land at the end of the dry season.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:31–35</span> These verses conclude the psalm with praise and prayer for God’s glory.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:31 glory of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> “Glory” here is not abstract but concrete and refers to God’s glorious creation, as it is paralleled by God’s “works.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.32"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:32 mountains . . . smoke.</span> Hills are the symbol of stability and firmness (46:2, 3), but God’s mere touch sets them aflame.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.34"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:34 I rejoice in the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalmist rejoices in the Lord by rejoicing in the Lord’s creation, in which the Lord Himself also rejoices (v. 31).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.35"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:35 Let sinners be consumed from the earth.</span> The psalmist would like to see the removal of everything that opposes the godly order he has so eloquently described.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.104.35"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 104:35 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page954" title="954" />Bless.</span> The final line forms an inclusion with the opening line.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 105</span> While Ps. 104 praises God for His acts in creating the world, this song meditates on His acts in the world’s continuing history. The first fifteen verses are quoted (along with Ps. 96 and part of Ps. 106) in 1 Chr. 16, perhaps indicating use of the psalm in worship. The poem falls into two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): vv. 1–6, which invite the singing of God’s praise, and vv. 7–45, which are the content of that praise.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:1–6</span> These verses invite the singing of God’s praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:1 among the peoples.</span> Israel cannot hide its light “under a basket” (Matt. 5:15). True people of God gladly bear witness to God’s grace throughout the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:2 his wondrous works.</span> Those acts of grace and judgment that God performs in history. God enters history and acts graciously in behalf of His people, remarkably so in the life, death, resurrection, and ascension of His only begotten Son.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:4 seek his presence.</span> Seek to live in His presence. The psalmist often testifies of the horror associated with the withdrawal of God’s friendship (22:1; 28:1).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:5 Remember.</span> “Remembering” God’s works is more than recalling what they were; it means reacting with faith and obedience to what they mean.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:7–45</span> These verses contain the content of the praise that is offered.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:8 He remembers.</span> As in v. 5, remembrance involves doing as well as knowing. In this case, God acts in the present based on the promises given to Abraham.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">covenant.</span> The specific covenant here is the Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 12:1–3; 15; 17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:9, 10 to Isaac . . . to Jacob.</span> God reaffirmed His covenant relationship with the descendants of Abraham. See Gen. 26:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:11 I will give the land of Canaan.</span> See Gen. 15:17–20.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:12 sojourners.</span> Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob lived in the Promised Land as resident aliens. They wandered from place to place in Canaan.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:14 he rebuked kings.</span> See Gen. 12:10–20; 26.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:15 prophets.</span> Abraham is referred to as a prophet in Gen. 20:7.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:16–22</span> God promoted Joseph to a position of power in Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:16 he summoned.</span> God directed the events in Egypt so that when famine threatened that country, Joseph was in power and able to save many people (Gen. 50:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:23 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page955" title="955" />Israel came to Egypt.</span> See Gen. 46.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">land of Ham.</span> Another name for Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:28 He sent darkness.</span> The psalmist emphasizes the ninth plague by naming it first.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:31 flies . . . gnats.</span> These are the third and fourth plagues in reverse order of their actual occurrence in Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.32"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:32 hail.</span> The fifth and sixth plagues are unmentioned by the psalmist. The plague of hail was the seventh.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.36"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:36 firstborn.</span> The tenth and final plague, after which Egypt allowed Israel to leave Goshen.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.37"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:37 silver and gold.</span> God’s great mercy and generosity may be seen here. As a slave nation in Egypt, the Israelites had little to call their own. Through the plagues, however, God struck fear into the hearts of the Egyptians so that they not only let Israel go but were willing to hand over their valuables to encourage Israel’s exodus (Ex. 12:33–36).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.40"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:40 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page956" title="956" />bread from heaven.</span> The manna. God’s providential mercy went beyond bringing them out of Egypt—He provided for them in the wilderness by giving them food and drink.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.42"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:42 his holy promise.</span> The Abrahamic covenant included the promise that God would make Israel “a great nation” (Gen. 12:2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.105.45"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 105:45 observe his laws.</span> The retelling of the history of Israel is for a purpose: to learn from it to obey God (see 107:43 note). The covenant relationship between God and His people is established and maintained by God alone as His work of grace. His people (indeed, all humanity) are responsible to reciprocate not merely in the formal observance of particular commands but appropriately with all of their being (Mark 12:29–34; cf. 10:20–22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 106</span> While Ps. 105 is mainly concerned with God’s redemptive acts, this psalm focuses on human sin.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:1 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Hb. <span class="italic">Hallelu yah</span>, “You (plural) praise Yah.”</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">he is good.</span> Though the writer is concerned about Israel’s suffering, he knows that its source is in Israel’s sin and not in God’s character.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:4 me.</span> The psalmist has no doubt that God will come to aid His chosen people, but he does not assume that he will personally enjoy God’s blessing. He turns to God in prayer for this.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:6 we . . . have sinned.</span> An introductory statement that gives the theme for the body of the psalm down through v. 39. Israel has deliberately and constantly rebelled against the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:7 rebelled by the sea.</span> The poet stands amazed at the stubbornness of his people. He remembers that a previous generation doubted God’s power—even though they had just witnessed the ten plagues—when they were caught between the Egyptian army and the Red Sea (Ex. 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:9 He rebuked the Red Sea.</span> By personifying <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page957" title="957" />the Red Sea, the psalmist makes it a part of God’s defeat of the powers of chaos.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">he led them through.</span> In spite of their sin, God saved them. God’s persevering love in the face of rejection is a major theme here, and indeed throughout the Bible.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:13 they soon forgot.</span> The people’s faith and thanks were short-lived. As remembrance (105:5 note) includes obedience, so forgetting leads to disobedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:17 Dathan . . . Abiram.</span> See Num. 16.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:20 exchanged the glory.</span> They put a metal idol in the place of God and worshiped it. As Paul points out (Rom. 1:21–23), idolatry consists in worshiping any part or aspect of creation as God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:22 wondrous works in the land of Ham.</span> Ham is another name for Egypt, and the works are preeminently the ten plagues.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:23 Moses . . . stood in the breach before him.</span> See Ex. 32:11–14. Moses interceded in behalf of the people and saved them from the wrath of God. In this, he foreshadowed the work of Jesus Christ, who not only prayed for His people but died to save them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:24 they despised the pleasant land.</span> They despised the Promised Land by not having faith that God could give it to them (Num. 13; 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:26 raised his hand.</span> This gesture accompanies a formal oath, showing God’s determination to judge the sons of Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:28 yoked themselves.</span> The language is derogatory; worshiping a foreign idol is like becoming a beast of burden.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page958" title="958" />Baal of Peor.</span> Baal was a god of the eastern Mediterranean region at the time Israel was entering the Promised Land. Baal took slightly different characteristics in each local worship site and so is often identified by the region.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">sacrifices offered to the dead.</span> This could refer to funeral rituals of some sort. Canaanite funeral rituals involved heavy drinking, feasting, and obscene lust. The whole incident, initiated by Balaam, is reported in Num. 25.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:31 counted to him as righteousness.</span> When Israel took the fateful steps toward idolatry, Phinehas took a violent step to bring Israel back to the way of God. As a result, God made a covenant with his family to give them the priesthood. Similar language is used in connection with the covenant promises given to Abraham (Gen. 15:6) and inherited by the church (Rom. 4:3). However, the sense of the phrase “counted to him as righteousness” is not the same in 106:31 as it is in Gen. 15:6 and Rom. 4:3. In Gen. 15:6 and Rom. 4:3, the righteousness in view is the individual’s <span class="italic">right standing</span> before God that secures eternal life. This righteousness is the perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to us by faith in Him alone (Rom. 4:4, 5; 2 Cor. 5:21). Ps. 106 concerns the <span class="italic">righteous reward</span> that Phinehas received, namely, a perpetual priesthood (Num. 25:10–13). Phinehas, no less than anyone else, received a right standing before God only through faith. He was not declared righteous before the Lord on the basis of His obedience. But like us, His justifying faith produced the fruit of obedience. We are justified by faith alone, but not by a faith that is alone. Good works follow faith, but they in no way secure for us our righteous standing before the Lord (cf. James 2:14–26 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.32"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:32 waters of Meribah.</span> See Num. 20:1–13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.33"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:33 made his spirit bitter.</span> By not trusting God to provide for their survival in the wilderness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.37"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:37 demons.</span> The spiritual reality behind the lifeless idols is demonic, a world of hostility to the one God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.39"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:39 played the whore.</span> Joining themselves to a false god is spiritual adultery.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.45"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:45 remembered his covenant.</span> God’s promises express the commitment that causes <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page959" title="959" />Him to continue with His people even though they turned their backs on Him. On remembrance, see note on 105:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.106.48"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 106:48 Blessed be the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> God is blessed in response to all the blessings He has granted in Pss. 90–106.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 107</span> This community thanksgiving accompanied the offering of sacrifices (v. 22). The date of its original composition is not certain. The psalm opens with an invitation to “give thanks” (vv. 1–3), followed by four examples of God’s steadfast love (vv. 4–32), each containing an invitation to “give thanks,” and closes with a hymn of thanksgiving and a concluding exhortation to lay hold of God’s steadfast love (vv. 33–43).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:1–3</span> These verses are an invitation to “give thanks.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:1 he is good.</span> See vv. 1, 8, 15, 21, 31, 43.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> God’s covenant devotion, by which He binds Himself to His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:3 gathered.</span> The situation after the Babylonian exile seems to be in view here.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:4–32</span> These verses provide four examples of God’s steadfast love.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:4–9</span> Example one: God guides those wandering in the wilderness to a city.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:6 they cried . . . he delivered them.</span> This section is the first of four that illustrate God’s readiness to answer the prayers of His people.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:10–16</span> Example two: God delivers His imprisoned people to freedom.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:12 bowed their hearts down.</span> God chastises His wayward people in order to elicit their repentance. See Heb. 12:1–13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:13 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page960" title="960" />they cried to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold"> . . . he delivered them.</span> See v. 6.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:17–22</span> Example three: God saves foolish rebels when they call on Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:17 fools.</span> Not because they were without natural intelligence but because they refused to face the reality that the Lord is God. “Foolishness” is an ethical-spiritual category, not an intellectual one.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:18 loathed any kind of food.</span> It seems that a physical malady, some kind of sickness, is in view here.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:20 his word.</span> As early as the creation account (Gen. 1:3), it is clear that God’s word is powerful and effective.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:22 sacrifices of thanksgiving.</span> This verse points to public worship in the temple.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:23–32</span> Example four: God rescues those in trouble on the seas.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:24 deeds of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The mystery, power, and beauty of the sea, with everything that lives in it, testifies eloquently to God’s wisdom (Gen. 1:9, 10, 21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:26 They mounted up . . . went down.</span> The ship as it rises and falls on the waves.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.28"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:28 they cried to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold"> . . . he delivered them.</span> See vv. 6, 13, 19.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:29 He made the storm be still.</span> God shows His divine power and might by controlling the chaotic sea. See notes on 18:4, 15. Christ demonstrated His power from on high when He stilled the waters (Mark 4:35–41).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:33–42</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page961" title="961" />These verses form a hymn of thanksgiving and a concluding exhortation to lay hold of God’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.34"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:34 because of the evil.</span> God does not arbitrarily bring destruction upon His people. Here the reason is identified as the people’s sin. A historical example may be found in 1 Kin. 17, where God determined to withhold rain and dew from Israel because Ahab and Jezebel had turned the nation toward Baal.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.36"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:36 establish a city.</span> The ultimate reference is to the conquest in which God gave the land of Canaan to Israel. They passed from the hard conditions of the wilderness wanderings into the pleasant land of Palestine.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.40"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:40 trackless wastes.</span> Perhaps a reference to the Babylonian exile.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.107.43"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 107:43 Whoever is wise.</span> The retelling of the history of Israel is for a purpose: to learn from it the steadfast love of God (see 105:45 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 108</span> This psalm was composed from two previous psalms. The first five verses are from 57:7–11, and vv. 6–13 are from 60:5–12. There are only minor changes of wording, but the overall effect of the psalm is quite different. Pss. 57; 60 include elements of complaint; this psalm is a statement of assurance. The psalm is comprised of two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): thanksgiving to God for His steadfast love (vv. 1–5) and dependence on God for His help (vv. 6–13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:1–5</span> These verses offer thanksgiving to God for His steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:1 steadfast.</span> The psalmist has resolved to praise the Lord, and nothing can cause him to swerve from his resolve to offer up his hymn of praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:2 I will awake the dawn.</span> See note on 57:8.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:3 among the peoples.</span> The psalmist realizes that God is more than the God of Israel. He is the king of the universe, and as a result, the psalmist will witness to God’s great deeds throughout the universe.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:4 your steadfast love.</span> Specifically, the mercy God has for the people who are in covenant relationship with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:5 above the heavens.</span> God is so great that not even the heavens can contain Him (1 Kin. 8:27). He is transcendent, yet in special ways (presently by the Holy Spirit) He is also immanent in that He compassionately condescends to dwell with His people.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:6–13</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page962" title="962" />These verses focus on dependence on God for His help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:7 God has promised in his holiness.</span> The divine oracle was probably spoken through a prophet associated with the temple. The sense of His message is that victory is forthcoming.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Shechem . . . Succoth.</span> These two places are associated with Jacob in Gen. 33:17–20 as the first two places the patriarch occupied after returning from his encounter with Esau. They are on opposite sides of the Jordan River.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:8 Gilead . . . Manasseh.</span> Both these areas are located, at least in part, east of the Jordan River.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Ephraim . . . Judah.</span> The two most powerful tribes in Israel. They were frequently rivals, but here they are united as parts of God’s army.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">scepter.</span> See Gen. 49:10.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:9</span> See 60:8 and notes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:10 me.</span> Likely the king, who speaks on behalf of the nation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.108.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 108:13 With God.</span> The writer confesses his confidence that through God’s power they will be victorious.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 109</span> The psalmist stands before a corrupt court, falsely accused of a crime. In his distress, he turns to God for help, asking Him to reverse the roles and allow the psalmist to judge the court, and one person in particular (either the judge or the accuser). The poet does not conceal his strong feelings against his enemies (Introduction: Characteristics and Themes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:1 Be not silent.</span> See note on 83:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:4 they accuse me.</span> The legal language here and elsewhere in the psalm reveals that the psalmist is a defendant in a courtroom setting.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:5 evil for good.</span> See note on 35:12.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">for my love.</span> What makes the writer’s plight so poignant is that his attackers were once friends but have turned treacherously against him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:6 wicked man . . . accuser.</span> The penalty for falsely accusing someone of a certain crime was the penalty corresponding to that crime (Deut. 19:16–21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page963" title="963" />may another take his office.</span> As this accuser brought false charges against the psalmist, so Judas Iscariot sought Christ’s death by turning Him over to the Jewish authorities. Afterward, Judas killed himself in remorse. Peter understood that this psalm was fulfilled in that situation and cited it as a replacement was sought for Judas among the disciples (Acts 1:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:9 fatherless . . . widow.</span> Among people who depended heavily on their relatives for social support, this verse was a hard-hitting curse, calling for punishment on the accuser and on his family.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:13 his name be blotted out.</span> The curses focus on eradicating the accuser’s family line. To have descendants stretching into the distant future was extremely important in ancient Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:17 let curses come upon him.</span> Once again the psalmist invokes the principle that the unrighteous will receive the penalty they are trying to call down upon another. See note on v. 6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:21 your name’s sake.</span> The psalmist appeals to God’s reputation (8:1). He belongs to God, and if he should die at the hand of the wicked, it will appear as if God can do nothing about evil.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:25 wag their heads.</span> In disgust.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:26 your steadfast love.</span> The Hebrew word for “steadfast love” refers salvation to God’s covenant faithfulness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.109.31"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 109:31 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page964" title="964" />stands at the right hand.</span> Instead of finding an accuser at his right hand, the psalmist finds his support in God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 110</span> There can be no doubt that this psalm looks forward to Christ. Jesus Himself cites it to show that David knew that its ultimate fulfillment would come in one greater than he (Mark 12:35–37 and par.). Even before Christ’s coming, a prophetic-messianic interpretation of the psalm was well known among Jewish interpreters. Nevertheless, like all other royal psalms, Ps. 110 does address the time in which it was first composed. It is likely that it was sung at the time of the coronation of the king. The composition seems to have been written after David defeated Jebus (Jerusalem) and celebrates his victory and enthronement in that city, explaining why he also inherits the royal priesthood of Melchizedek. Focusing on two divine oracles, the first (v. 1) shows the close, but subordinate, relationship that the human king bears to the divine King. The NT writers cite this oracle to demonstrate Jesus’ post-resurrection glory and to point to the struggle between God and the spiritual powers of evil (Acts 2:34, 35; 1 Cor. 15:25; Eph. 1:20; Col. 3:1; Heb. 1:13; 1 Pet. 3:22). The second oracle appointed the king as a priest, but as a special type of priest. As opposed to the hereditary Aaronic priesthood, this priesthood is descended from Melchizedek (Gen. 14:18–23), whose mysterious origins are related to Jesus Christ, the Great High Priest (Heb. 5:6; 7:17; 8:1; 10:12–14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:title</span> The truth of the authorship title of this psalm is critical for its interpretation in the NT (Mark 12:35–37).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:1</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> As the translators indicate with the use of small capital letters, this is God’s name.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Lord.</span> This title is often used for God but can also be addressed to a king or other respected person. The NT makes clear that King David refers to his son—who is also the Son of God—as his “Lord” (Mark 12:35–37). The promised Messiah descended from David but is greater than David.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">right hand.</span> The place of honor. After His resurrection, Jesus was exalted to the right hand of God in heaven.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">enemies.</span> In the OT they were physical flesh-and-blood enemies of Israel. In the NT the battle is intensified, as Jesus fights against the invisible, cosmic powers of evil.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">footstool.</span> A place of disgrace, symbolizing subjugation. After a victory, Near Eastern leaders would humiliate their defeated enemies by stepping on their heads or necks (Josh. 10:24–26).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:2 sends forth.</span> God will enlarge the King’s authority.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zion.</span> See note on 2:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">scepter.</span> A common symbol of governmental power and authority.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:3 dew of your youth.</span> A difficult phrase in the Hebrew. The image compares the dew, which appears suddenly during the night and is present in the morning, with the eager and mysterious appearance of the king’s troops.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:4 order of Melchizedek.</span> The regular priesthood of Israel was from Aaron, and its duties were limited to religious worship. Little is known about Melchizedek, but it appears that he combined the functions of king and priest (Gen. 14:18–20). David also combined these functions to an extent, as he offered sacrifices and helped prepare for the temple building in addition to ruling as king (1 Chr. 16:1–3; 17; 22:1—26:19). Jesus Christ is both king and priest, though not descended from the line of Aaron (Heb. 5:6; 7:17; 8:1; 10:12–14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:5 Lord.</span> A title of respect (v. 1 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:6 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page965" title="965" />judgment among the nations.</span> God often used the human king to bring His judgment upon the nations through warfare. As applied to Jesus, this verse anticipates the last judgment that will take place at the end of time.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.110.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 110:7 He will drink.</span> The Hebrew of this verse is difficult. The king finds refreshment during the battle and can carry on God’s work of judgment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 111</span> Pss. 111; 112 are twin psalms. Both begin with “Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!” Both contain an alphabetic acrostic with each half-line starting with the subsequent letter in the Hebrew alphabet, and both focus on the fear of the Lord. The difference is that Ps. 111 focuses on God, and Ps. 112 focuses on God’s people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:1 in the company.</span> The holy congregation as they gather to praise the Lord in the sanctuary.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:2 works of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalmist has in mind the great acts of redemption that God performed in their past. The preeminent example is the exodus, when God rescued His people from their oppressors in Egypt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:3 splendor and majesty.</span> See note on 8:5.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his righteousness.</span> God acts in history in conformity to His character and law. Through His great historical acts, people can recognize His righteousness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:4 remembered.</span> Remembrance involves more than an act of the memory; it also involves devotion and obedience. See 44:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">gracious and merciful.</span> Israel, due to sin, could not deserve God’s salvation; it springs from God’s love for His people. See Ex. 34:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:5 provides food.</span> This may allude to the wilderness wanderings when God miraculously provided food for Israel (e.g., Num. 11).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">covenant.</span> When God acts to save His people, He does so because of the relationship He has already established with them.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">forever.</span> God is not fickle. His people may depend on Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:6 inheritance of the nations.</span> God gave to Israel the land of a number of peoples when He gave them the Promised Land (Deut. 7:1–6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.111.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 111:10 fear of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> This well-known phrase captures the right way to approach the Lord. The Lord is God, inspiring reverence and awe. He will make good His threats against the wicked. See notes on 34:7; 36:1; 128:1; 130:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 112</span> This psalm is in the center of three psalms that begin with the expression “Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!” (Heb. <span class="italic">hallelu yah</span>). Pss. 111 and 112 are both acrostics, each half-line beginning with successive letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and they complement each <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page966" title="966" />other in content. Ps. 111 tells about God and His deeds, while Ps. 112 describes the happiness of the person who serves God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:1 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">in his commandments.</span> The righteous person receives the law as a testimony of God; the Lord’s commandments are a joy, to be kept in love and gratitude for His great salvation. See Ps. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:2 offspring will be mighty.</span> Blessed is well-being in the family.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:3 Wealth and riches.</span> Blessed is well-being in finances.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">righteousness.</span> Blessed is well-being in spirituality.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:4 in the darkness.</span> Darkness is a metaphor for troubled times. The psalmist knows that there are hard times, but he also knows that “for those who love God all things work together for good” (Rom. 8:28).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">gracious, merciful, and righteous.</span> The godly man reflects the attributes of his Lord; see 111:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:7 not afraid of bad news.</span> Blessed is well-being in the emotions. The righteous man does not fear trouble or distress because he knows that God is able to bring him through it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:9 has distributed freely.</span> Generosity is a basic characteristic of a servant of God. Paul quotes this verse in a context that encourages generosity (2 Cor. 9:9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.112.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 112:10 desire of the wicked will perish.</span> Just as the way of the wicked will come to nothing (see 2:12 note), so will the desire of the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 113</span> With its opening “Praise the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>!” this psalm continues the theme of praise found in Pss. 111; 112, and it contains two strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): vv. 1–3 (the Lord is to be praised) and vv. 4–9 (the incomparable Lord is to be praised). Ps. 113 is the first of several psalms used to celebrate the festivals of Passover, Weeks, Tabernacles, new moon, and the dedication of the temple. Pss. 113–18 were sung during the Passover, so it is likely that Jesus and His disciples sang them during their last evening together (Matt. 26:30; Mark 14:26). Cf. Ps. 113 (see v. 9) with the songs of Hannah (1 Sam. 2, esp. vv. 5, 8) and Mary (Luke 1:46–55).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:1–3</span> These verses teach that the Lord is to be praised.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:1 O servants of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> A priest leads the faithful in worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:2 Blessed.</span> See note on 103:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:3 rising of the sun to its setting.</span> That is, from east to west or everywhere.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:4–9</span> These verses teach that the incomparable Lord is to be praised.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:4 high above all nations.</span> In the ancient Near East, each nation had its imagined national gods. Only the God of Israel could proclaim Himself the true God of all nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:5 Who is like.</span> Yahweh is incomparable.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.113.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:6 who looks far down.</span> Part of God’s greatness is His condescension, as at Bethlehem (Luke 2:4–7; Phil. 2:5–11).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page967" title="967" />on the heavens.</span> Often the heavens are spoken of as the dwelling place of God, but strictly speaking, God’s infinite transcendence is such that even the heavens are unable to contain Him (1 Kin. 8:27).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 113:7–9 raises . . . lifts . . . gives.</span> These verses employ several figures that show how God reverses the circumstances of His people; see 30:5, 11.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 114</span> Jewish tradition assigned this psalm to the eighth day of Passover. In eight short verses and with virtually unrivaled poetic subtlety, the psalmist describes the tremendous power of God’s visual self-revelation (theophany) at the time of Israel’s salvation from Egypt and entry into Canaan (Ex. 13:21). Stories evoke responses. The psalm begins with a brief story about God (vv. 1, 2), then tells of creation’s response to this story (vv. 3, 4) and raises a question as to why this particular response was drawn out (vv. 5, 6), before providing its own answer to the question in the form of an imperative (vv. 7, 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:1, 2</span> These verses tell a short story about God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:1 went out from Egypt.</span> The exodus was the most tremendous display of God’s redemptive power during the OT period. It was constantly remembered and became a source of encouragement for later generations, including Christians who know that they are “strangers and exiles” in search of their true “homeland” (Heb. 11:13, 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:2 his sanctuary.</span> The people and their country were God’s sanctuary because God chose to be present with them. The tabernacle, and then the temple, symbolized His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:3, 4</span> These verses tell creation’s response to the exodus.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:3 The sea looked.</span> The Red Sea is personified (Ex. 14; 15), poetically describing the crossing of the sea as a conflict between it and the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:4 mountains.</span> The mountains were symbols of power, firmness, and endurance (Ps. 46). God’s appearance shakes them like frightened rams.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:5, 6</span> These verses raise the question as to why the response in vv. 3–4 was drawn out.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:5 What ails you.</span> The psalmist questions the poetically personified sea and mountains, making explicit what was implicit in the first two stanzas of the poem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:7, 8</span> These verses provide the answer to the question raised in vv. 5, 6 in the form of an imperative.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:7 Tremble.</span> When God comes in judgment and with power, the inhabitants of the earth should fear because they will be objects of His judgment. Nothing can stand in His way.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.114.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 114:8 turns the rock into a pool.</span> God’s provision at Kadesh (Num. 20:1–13) demonstrates His power and compassion.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 115</span> A liturgy for public worship, declaring Israel’s faith in the Lord over against the worthless idols of the nations. In four strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) it teaches about ultimate trust: trusting the Lord results in praise to God (v. 1), excludes idols (vv. 2–11), brings blessings (vv. 12–15), and results in praise to God (vv. 16–18).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:1</span> This verse shows that trusting the Lord results in praise to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:1 your steadfast love . . . faithfulness.</span> God’s covenantal affection for and faithfulness to His people result in glory to His name.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:2–11</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page968" title="968" />These verses show that trusting the Lord excludes idols.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:2 nations.</span> The nations that surrounded Israel at different times: Canaan, Babylonia, Assyria, Persia, and Egypt.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Where is their God.</span> As the nations observed Israel struggling, they would say that Israel’s God was unable or unwilling to act.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:3 all that he pleases.</span> A notable expression of God’s sovereignty.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:4 Their idols.</span> The psalmist draws a sharp contrast between the living God of Israel and the man-made deities of the ancient Near East. See Is. 44:6–23; Rom. 1:21–23; theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter29.xhtml#page1498">Syncretism</a>” on p. 1498.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:8 like them.</span> When people construct their own gods, they make them in their own image. As they worship these gods, they are more and more conformed to their likeness. See 2 Kin. 17:15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:9 O Israel.</span> A reference to all the people of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:10 house of Aaron.</span> The speaker addresses the priests of Israel.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:11 You who fear the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Finally, the psalmist singles out those who tremble before the Lord. These are the faithful within Israel and, as later usage suggests, also proselytes.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:12–15</span> These verses show that trusting the Lord brings blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:12, 13 he will bless . . . bless.</span> That is, empower for an abundant life in His presence. The repetition underscores the promise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:14 increase.</span> Lit. “may the Lord add upon you,” referring to all of types of blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:15 who made heaven and earth.</span> As the creator of all, God has the power to provide for His people all the blessings they need. See 121:2; 124:8; 134:3; 146:6.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:16–18</span> These verses show that trusting the Lord results in praise to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:16 the earth he has given to the children of man.</span> God created the earth, and it belongs to Him. Along with the gift of the earth comes the responsibility to work and serve God faithfully.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:17 The dead.</span> See note on 88:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.115.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 115:18 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page969" title="969" />we will bless.</span> God’s people will bless the Lord because He has blessed them, that is, they will praise the Lord because He has empowered them to live an abundant life in His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 116</span> This psalm is perhaps the most personal of all the songs of thanksgiving, as it brings to expression the thoughts and feelings of someone in the deepest of trouble who experienced God’s personal care.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:1 I love the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalmist expresses his deep affection for the Lord, grounding it in God’s love toward him. God showed His love for the psalmist by hearing his prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:3 snares of death.</span> It was as if ropes came out of a grave, pulling the psalmist into the ground.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:5 Gracious . . . righteous . . . merciful.</span> God reveals His kindness in His answer to the psalmist’s request. He does not stand at a distance when His people suffer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:10 when I spoke.</span> It was the psalmist’s faith in God that led him (text note) to pray to Him in the beginning.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:11 All mankind are liars.</span> He remembers his complaint; he apparently had been the object of a false accusation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:13 cup of salvation.</span> This may be a reference to a drink offering (Num. 15:10), but it is more likely a metaphor, contrasting with the more common “cup” of God’s wrath (75:8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:14 in the presence of all his people.</span> The psalmist promises to publicly proclaim God’s great acts (22:22 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:15 Precious . . . is the death.</span> Lit. “Precious in the Lord’s eyes is the death of his loved ones.” Since the psalmist lived to write this psalm, the sense seems to be that God’s loved ones are so precious that He keeps them from dying. This interpretation finds confirmation in 72:14: “From <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page970" title="970" />oppression and violence he redeems their life, and precious is their blood in his sight.” The last clause is quite similar to 116:15 and could be translated “for their blood is precious in his eyes.” Here “blood” (death) being “precious” to God clearly means He keeps them from dying. Ultimately, this psalm is fulfilled in the resurrection of Christ and the life He grants to His people, which enables them to escape the eternal death of the lake of fire (Rev. 20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:18 pay my vows.</span> See notes on 22:22, 25; see also 61:5; 66:13.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.116.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 116:19 courts of the house of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The temple in Jerusalem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.117.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 117</span> This is the shortest chapter in the Bible, but the song’s exuberant praise reaches to all the nations. Paul uses the psalm to show that the nations share in the promises to the patriarchs (Rom. 15:7–11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.117.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 117:1 all nations.</span> The call to praise goes beyond Israel to all nations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.117.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 117:2 his steadfast love.</span> Specifically, the love connected with His covenant. This verse, though using different vocabulary, may be seen as a meditation on the truth expressed in Ex. 34:6. It celebrates God’s covenant relationship with His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 118</span> This psalm concludes the section associated with the celebration of Passover (Pss. 113–18). As the last song of the group, it may have been the final psalm in the mind of Jesus as He celebrated Passover with His disciples (Mark 14:26). Jesus quoted vv. 22, 23 about Himself (Mark 12:10, 11; Matt. 21:42; Luke 13:35; cf. Acts 4:11). The people greeted Jesus’ triumphal entry with shouts of joy taken from this psalm (Mark 11:9, 10; Luke 19:38; John 12:13). The main speaker is likely the king (vv. 5–21), but the psalm as a whole is a liturgy with other speakers as well (vv. 21–27). The references to altar, temple, and procession (vv. 19, 20, 27) show that it was used in corporate worship. This is a psalm of thanksgiving in which the psalmist expresses his deep distress, how he prayed to the Lord, and how the Lord rescued him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:1 his steadfast love endures forever.</span> A refrain of this psalm and Ps. 136.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:5 I called . . . the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">answered.</span> This verse summarizes the entire psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:6 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">is on my side.</span> The heart of the covenant of grace: God siding with His redeemed. The implication for the psalmist is that he has nothing to fear from anyone because God is in control. Victory is not guaranteed by superior forces or weapons; it is a gift from God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:10–12 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page971" title="971" />I cut them off . . . I cut them off.</span> While it is true that the psalmist placed his trust in the Lord and not in himself (v. 8) and that the Lord was his help (v. 13) and strength and salvation (v. 14), it is equally true that he exercised his human effort to win the battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:12 fire among thorns.</span> The simile has two sides: thorns, with their sharp points, are apt descriptions of an enemy; they also burn quickly, like an enemy running away.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:14 my salvation.</span> For the psalmist the “salvation” in view is victory in battle.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:15 Glad songs of salvation.</span> Israel responds to God’s help by singing victory songs that rejoice in God’s salvation.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">right hand.</span> The arm that is used to wield the sword in battle (v. 16; cf. Ex. 15:6, 12).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:17 recount the deeds of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The purpose of the psalms of thanksgiving.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:19 gates of righteousness.</span> The entrance to the sanctuary, leading to the presence of God, where the psalmist will offer thanks. The gates are righteous because the one who dwells behind them is righteous, and those who enter must be righteous as well (Pss. 15; 24).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:21 my salvation.</span> See note on v. 14.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:22 stone that the builders rejected.</span> The metaphor likely referred originally to the king, who represented his people. The stone was cast off in despair when defeat seemed inevitable, and victory was no longer a realistic hope (but see the following note).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">cornerstone.</span> The low and insignificant, despite having been rejected, is exalted to the chief place. Jesus later applies this passage to Himself (Matt. 21:42; Mark 12:10; Luke 20:17; cf. Acts 4:11; 1 Pet. 2:7). Jesus is the cornerstone (Eph. 2:20), cast away by the earthly rulers of His day but exalted to the right hand of the Father. To some this is a cause for stumbling (Is. 8:14; 1 Pet. 2) but to others the basis of hope.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:24 the day that the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">has made.</span> Because of God’s victory, His people will turn the day of despair into a day of worship before the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:26 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page972" title="972" />Blessed is he who comes in the name of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Later, this cry is lifted up by the crowds as they welcome the true king, Christ Jesus, into Jerusalem (Matt. 21:9). In a way still beyond their understanding, Jesus was about to defeat sin and death on the cross.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.27"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:27 festal sacrifice.</span> The sacrifice was performed in public worship before the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.118.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 118:29 Oh give thanks to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The psalm ends as it began.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 119</span> As Ps. 117 has the distinction of being the shortest chapter in the Bible, so Ps. 119 is the longest. The psalm is an acrostic of twenty-two stanzas, one for each letter of the Hebrew alphabet. The eight poetic lines of each stanza begin with the same Hebrew letter.</p>
      <p>The number eight may be connected with eight Hebrew words that appear throughout the psalm concerning its main theme. The words are translated variously as “law,” “testimonies,” “precepts,” “statutes,” “commandments,” “rules,” and “word.” In five stanzas all eight Hebrew words occur, and every stanza has at least six of the eight.</p>
      <p>Verse 97 is perhaps the theological heart of the psalm, as it expresses the psalmist’s love for God’s law. The psalmist also has a deep desire to live in keeping with this law. Yet the psalmist also recognizes that he has strayed from time to time from the standard set forth in the law. While the emphasis of the psalm is on love for and obedience to the law of God, this is balanced to some degree by an awareness of the need for forgiveness.</p>
      <p>The law is a faithful expression of God’s character. God sent His Son to keep the law for us. The law no longer condemns us, setting us free to accept it as our own guide for pleasing the One who died in our place.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:1 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">who walk.</span> A metaphor for the activities of daily life.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">law of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The law, or Torah, refers to the first five books of the Bible as a unit, or to the legal sections of those books. Here the latter is meant: the Ten Commandments and the other laws of the Pentateuch.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:2 whole heart.</span> The psalmist is not speaking of a mere external adherence to the law. He calls for obedience that comes from a deep-seated faith in the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:4 You have commanded your precepts.</span> God entered into a covenant relationship with Israel freely out of grace, and within that relationship God gave them His law to obey. He was not asking them to earn His favor or pay for their redemption. It was the way of thankful obedience for those in covenant with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:5 Oh.</span> The psalmist does not think of himself as an example of perfect obedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:7 when I learn.</span> Worship and obedience require knowledge of Scripture.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:8 I will.</span> The psalmist decides to follow God’s law.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:9–16</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page973" title="973" />The psalmist seeks to keep his way pure by meditating on God’s law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:9 according to your word.</span> God does not hide from us what pleases Him. He states it clearly in His Word, the Bible.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:10 I seek . . . let me not wander.</span> There is a deep connection between striving after moral perfection and the realization that the quest is itself impossible without God’s help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:15 I will meditate.</span> See note on 1:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:17 that I may live.</span> The psalmist’s life depends on grace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:18 Open my eyes.</span> God’s grace is needed to illumine His Word. He must guide His people’s understanding.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:19 sojourner.</span> See Heb. 11:13. His true home is not on the earth but with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.22"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:22 Take away from me.</span> The psalm goes beyond praise of the law to a petition for God’s grace in distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:23 princes sit plotting against me.</span> Perhaps indicating the royal status of the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.29"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:29 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page974" title="974" />Put false ways far from me.</span> The psalmist sees that if left to himself, he will walk in ways contrary to God’s law.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:33–40</span> The psalmist implores the Lord for instruction in His laws.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.34"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:34 with my whole heart.</span> He resolves with his whole mind, strength, and will. The psalmist expresses his deep devotion to the Lord. He loves the Lord and wants to be obedient. Jesus told His disciples, “If you love me, you will keep my commandments” (John 14:15).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.36"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:36 Incline my heart.</span> He realizes that his love for the Lord has its source in God Himself.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.37"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:37 Turn my eyes from . . . worthless things.</span> Matching his positive desire to move closer to God’s law, there is a corresponding negative desire to turn away from worthless things, particularly idols. See note on 31:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.38"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:38 your promise.</span> Likely referring to God’s covenant promise of blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.41"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:41 your steadfast love.</span> God’s love or devotion to those in covenant with Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.45"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:45 wide place.</span> In keeping God’s laws, the writer will find freedom.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.49"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:49 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page975" title="975" />Remember.</span> See 44:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.52"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:52 your rules from of old.</span> Given through Moses and contained in the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.54"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:54 Your statutes . . . my songs.</span> The law was not simply a matter of obedience for the psalmist but of worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.55"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:55 name.</span> See 8:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.57"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:57 my portion.</span> The poet’s portion is not merely an inheritance in the land but the Lord Himself (Num. 18:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.63"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:63 companion.</span> Obedience to the Lord takes place in community with other believers who also serve the Lord.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">who fear you.</span> See 34:7.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:65–72</span> The psalmist found that affliction brought him back from wandering away from God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.67"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:67 I went astray.</span> God uses distress and suffering in our lives to bring us back to Him (cf. Ps. 31; Heb. 12:1–13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.70"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:70 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page976" title="976" />like fat.</span> Cf. 1 Tim. 4:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.71"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:71 It is good for me . . . afflicted.</span> In retrospect the writer is thankful for his suffering because it has led to a new intimacy with the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.74"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:74 shall see me.</span> As others who share the psalmist’s deep commitment to the Lord see his happiness, they will be encouraged.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.75"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:75 you have afflicted me.</span> See vv. 67, 71.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.82"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:82 My eyes long for.</span> Because he has been looking so long in expectation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.83"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:83 wineskin in the smoke.</span> A striking metaphor, unparalleled elsewhere. The smoke damages the wineskin, which is comparable to the harm the writer has suffered at the hand of his enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.84"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:84 When will you judge.</span> The poet expects God to come to his aid and punish those who persecute him unjustly. God’s seeming delay is a trial for him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.86"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:86 with falsehood.</span> See 38:19.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.87"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:87 I have not forsaken your precepts.</span> The psalmist would not allow his obedience to depend on his situation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.89"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:89 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page977" title="977" />Forever.</span> As God is eternal, so is His word. It is forever valid. It speaks to all people and for all time.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.93"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:93 forget.</span> In the psalms, forgetting something implies disobedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.97"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:97 I love your law.</span> The psalmist loves the law because it comes from his God and Savior. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter03.xhtml#page124">The Law of God</a>” on p. 124.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.98"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:98 wiser than my enemies.</span> His enemies rebel against God and reject the law, refusing the insight that God their creator can give them.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.99"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:99 more understanding than all my teachers.</span> The psalmist does not mean this as a boast but as an emphatic expression of his devotion to God’s law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.102"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:102 you have taught me.</span> The psalmist does not claim to study with superior intelligence or even superior determination; he attributes everything to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.105"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:105 lamp to my feet.</span> God’s revelation provides the insight to guide His servant. He will not trip in the darkness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.109"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:109 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page978" title="978" />my life in my hand continually.</span> The psalmist’s obedience is not risk-free, for it exposes him to the wiles of his enemies. He could wish to be free of the danger, but he is more concerned to live a godly life in spite of it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.113"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:113 double-minded.</span> The poet is of a single mind; he loves God and His law. Consequently he is stable, unlike the double-minded man (James 1:8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.119"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:119 dross.</span> The waste that results when metal is smelted. When the wicked are similarly cast off, the righteous remain as refined silver. Cf. Prov. 25:3–5; Is. 1:22, 25.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.120"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:120 fear of you.</span> The fear of the Lord is vividly described.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.123"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:123 My eyes long.</span> See v. 82.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.124"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:124 according to your steadfast love.</span> The devotion that God shows toward His covenant people, demonstrating His mercy and compassion.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.126"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:126 time for the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">to act.</span> With the direct honesty characteristic of the psalmist, he tells God that He has delayed His judgment long enough. The wicked deserve the punishment they are about to receive.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.130"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:130 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page979" title="979" />The unfolding of your words.</span> It is not clear whether the writer refers to the initial act of revelation, the process of interpreting God’s Word, or applying the law to his heart. Perhaps all three are intended as a single process bringing light, hope, and understanding to the dark soul.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.131"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:131 pant.</span> The concept is the same as 42:1, 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.132"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:132 with those who love your name.</span> Cf. Rom. 8:28.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.133"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:133 Keep steady my steps.</span> The psalmist wants the Lord to guide him through life. He realizes that one is within the will of God while seeking to obey His revealed Word. But he also knows that obedience is impossible unless God supplies the grace to do so.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.135"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:135 Make your face shine upon your servant.</span> An image of divine favor (see 31:16; 67:1). The psalmist asks for God to come and be with him. He wants to live in the consciousness of God’s favor. Cf. the priestly blessing in Num. 6:22–27.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.137"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:137 Righteous are you.</span> God acts according to His nature; there is nothing arbitrary or inconsistent about Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.145"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:145 With my whole heart.</span> The psalmist is a model of fervent and honest prayer to God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.147"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:147 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page980" title="980" />I rise before dawn.</span> The poet’s first thought as he awakens is the Lord. His prayer is frequent as well as fervent.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.149"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:149 according to your steadfast love . . . justice.</span> God’s love and devotion toward His people are not incompatible with His law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.151"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:151 you are near.</span> God’s covenantal presence nullifies the negative effects of the presence of the enemy (v. 150).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.153"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:153 I do not forget your law.</span> The psalmist expects that God will bless him because he is obedient. Such an attitude could be presumptuous, a sin that the book of Job guards against, but it could also arise from faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.154"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:154 Plead my cause.</span> This phrase comes from the courtroom. The psalmist asks the Lord to intercede for him before his enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.156"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:156 Great is your mercy.</span> See Lam. 3:23.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.161"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:161 Princes persecute me.</span> The opposition of princes indicates that the psalmist is probably a powerful person, perhaps the king of Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">without cause.</span> See 38:19.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.167"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:167 I love them exceedingly.</span> Obedience is not an onerous task for the psalmist; he follows God’s law because he wants to.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.169"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:169 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page981" title="981" />give me understanding.</span> This line sums up one of the major themes of the psalm: the desire for insight into God’s will so that the writer may act in obedience.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.170"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:170 deliver me.</span> Another major theme of the psalm is summed up: the psalmist’s need for deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.175"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:175 Let my soul live.</span> Once again, an indication that the poet was in the midst of trouble at the time he composed his song.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.119.176"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 119:176 seek your servant.</span> The psalmist concludes by invoking God as his shepherd (Ps. 23; John 10); he begs Him to bring him back into the flock.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 120</span> This psalm is the first of the fifteen Songs of Ascents (Pss. 120–34). As tradition suggests, they were sung by pilgrims traveling to the mountain of God (Zion) to worship. Ps. 120 opens the group appropriately with the song of a faithful worshiper who is far away from the temple among pagan people (v. 5 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:1</span> Gives the theme of the psalm: Giving thanks for answered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:2</span> Recounts the psalmist praying for complete deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:2 lying lips . . . deceitful tongue.</span> The psalmist’s enemies slander him unmercifully.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:3, 4</span> A warning about reaping what one sows.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:3 to you.</span> The enemy whose lies trouble the psalmist.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:4 warrior’s sharp arrows.</span> The liars will be repaid in kind.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:5–7</span> Expresses the psalmist’s longing for peace.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.120.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 120:5 Meshech . . . Kedar.</span> The writer may be speaking figuratively, comparing the treatment he receives from God’s people to what he might expect from barbarians. The literal places are far from Israel and also from each other. Meshech was in Asia Minor (Gen. 10:2; Ezek. 38:2), and Kedar was in Arabia (Is. 21:16; Ezek. 7:21).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 121</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page982" title="982" />The first verse suggests why this psalm was included among the “Songs of Ascents” (Ps. 120 note). The psalmist’s vision is set firmly on the final goal, Jerusalem, and Zion, the hill of God. The pronoun shift from “I” to “you” could represent an internal dialogue (similar to Pss. 42; 43; or 103) or more likely the words of the pilgrim who begins the psalm followed by the assurance spoken by a priest or other person.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:1 to the hills.</span> Jerusalem is in the hill country; the temple was also built on a hill—Zion.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">From where does my help come?</span> Not from the gods who are worshiped in the hills, but from the Lord, who made the hills (see v. 2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:2 who made heaven and earth.</span> Since God made heaven and earth, He made the hills and therefore controls them. See 115:15; 124:8; 134:3; 146:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:3 He will not let your foot be moved.</span> A particularly apt image of God’s careful protection; Israel is notorious for its rocky and slippery terrain.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">keeps.</span> The key word of the psalm, as it occurs six times.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:4 neither slumber nor sleep.</span> God never sleeps, and there is no danger that the psalmist will be forgotten. Elijah ridiculed the prophets of Baal by sarcastically suggesting their god was asleep when they needed him (1 Kin. 18:27).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:5 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">is your keeper.</span> This is the central colon in the poem. There are eight cola before it and eight cola after it.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shade.</span> As a person’s shadow is always with him, so is God with His people. The metaphor comes from ancient treaty language and has covenantal overtones.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:7 evil.</span> Better: “harm,” “trouble,” “calamity.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.121.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 121:8 going out . . . coming in.</span> A figure of speech for “everywhere.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 122</span> This Song of Ascents records the decision of the poet to accompany a group on a visit to Jerusalem. The psalm describes the glories of Jerusalem, where God is worshiped and where the dynasty of David rules (2 Sam. 7), asking God to protect the city and its inhabitants.</p>
      <p>This psalm is similar to the “Zion” songs, which extol the city of Jerusalem (Pss. 46; 48; 76). Jerusalem was prized above other cities because God chose to reveal Himself there to His people. Since Christ has come, God’s people can meet Him in Christ anywhere (John 4:19–23). Jerusalem represents all believers (Gal. 4:26), and it typifies the coming New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:9–27).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:1, 2</span> Expresses a rejoicing in Jerusalem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:1 I.</span> David is the speaker, although the circumstances of composition are not revealed. Later the psalm would be appropriate for pilgrims going to Jerusalem, as for one of the major festivals (Ex. 23:14–19).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:3–5</span> Expresses an exulting over Jerusalem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:4 decreed for Israel.</span> Perhaps a reference to the law of centralization of worship (Deut. 12) or to laws connected with the annual festivals.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page983" title="983" />thrones for judgment.</span> The king was the paramount judge in the land, and Jerusalem was the political as well as religious capital of Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">house of David.</span> “House” here has the sense of “dynasty.”</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:6–9</span> A prayer for Jerusalem.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:6 peace.</span> The well-known Hebrew term <span class="italic">shalom,</span> which denotes wholeness and health. The prayer is for absence of war and for prosperity and growth. See 125:5; 128:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:8 my brothers and companions’ sake.</span> The psalm promotes a sense of community among the people of God. Ultimately, Jerusalem is not bricks and mortar but people in relationship with one another and with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.122.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 122:9 the house of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">our God.</span> The temple building stands for the presence of God in the midst of the people of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 123</span> The last two verses (vv. 3, 4) show that this prayer arises from a situation of distress and persecution. The threefold repetition of “mercy” in vv. 2, 3 shows us the heart of the psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 123:1, 2</span> Teaches the appropriate posture in times of distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 123:1 I lift up my eyes.</span> See 121:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">enthroned in the heavens.</span> The ark and the cherubim in the Most Holy Place were in a representative sense God’s earthly throne, but the psalmist, like Solomon, knew that “heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain” Him (cf. 1 Kin. 8:27).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 123:2 our eyes look to the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">our God.</span> A servant watches the employer’s hand for a variety of reasons: to receive orders, to hear instruction, to receive salary or provisions. The verse teaches that God’s people are utterly dependent upon Him for every aspect of their well-being.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">till he has mercy upon us.</span> The main theme of the psalm.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 123:3, 4</span> Teaches the appropriate plea in times of distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.123.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 123:3 Have mercy . . . have mercy.</span> See note on v. 2.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">more than enough of contempt.</span> The strong wording has led some to date the psalm to the period following the Babylonian exile of the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span></p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 124</span> In this psalm of thanksgiving the people praise the Lord for delivering them from a dangerous confrontation with their enemies. The psalm is included in the “Songs of Ascents,” indicating its use during festal pilgrimages. The deliverance described was not necessarily recent but could have been the exodus from Egypt. Today the psalm appeals to the Lord as the one who is able to protect His church from the attacks of principalities and powers in the spiritual realm (Eph. 6:10–20).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:1–5</span> Reflects on what could have happened.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:1 on our side.</span> See note on 118:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">let Israel now say.</span> These words would be spoken by a priest leading the congregation in corporate thanksgiving.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page984" title="984" />swallowed us up alive.</span> The enemies would have killed them. See note on Prov. 1:12.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:4 the flood.</span> See 18:4, 15 and notes.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:6–8</span> These verses bless the Lord for what actually happened.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:6 their teeth.</span> The enemy is compared to a lion (34:10; 58:6) or a dog (59:6, 14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.124.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 124:8 who made heaven and earth.</span> Israel has nothing to fear while God fights for her. See 115:15; 121:2; 134:3; 146:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 125</span> The sixth of the Songs of Ascents begins like a confident Zion hymn (cf. Pss. 46; 48; 76). From the temple on Mount Zion the Lord provides protection for His people. The psalm is, however, a variation on the typical psalm of confidence in that its focus is on the one who trusts: an affirmation about those who trust (vv. 1–3) and a prayer for those who trust (vv. 4, 5).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:1–3</span> These verses are an affirmation about those who trust.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:2 mountains surround Jerusalem.</span> The surrounding mountains were important in the defense of the city and picture God’s protective presence (12:1; 2 Kin. 6:17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:3 scepter of wickedness.</span> The scepter is a symbol of political and military rule, in this case pointing to the oppression of the people of God by a wicked, possibly foreign force.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">stretch out their hands.</span> By way of imitation, or under the pressures of a corrupt government and society.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:4, 5</span> These verses are a prayer for those who trust.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:4 Do good.</span> The psalmist prays for people to reap what they have sown.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">to those who are good.</span> While it is true from one perspective that “there is no one who does good” (14:1; 53:1), it is also true that David said people repaid him evil for the “good” that he did (35:12), and another psalmist invites us to “do good” (37:3). This later text couples the invitation to do good with an invitation to “trust” the Lord. Likewise in Ps. 125, “those who are good” (v. 4) are “those who trust in the Lord” (v. 1). Doing good is an expression of faith in the Lord, not an alternative to faith or a meritorious addition to faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.125.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 125:5 Peace.</span> See note on 122:6–8.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.126.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 126</span> The psalm is about restoration, both a remembrance of restoration in the past (vv. 1–3) and a prayer for restoration in the present (vv. 4–6).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 126:1–3</span> These verses are a remembrance of restoration in the past.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.126.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 126:1 When the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">restored the fortunes of Zion.</span> The allusion is to the return from Babylonian <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page985" title="985" />exile in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>, when the captive people of Israel were permitted to return to their country (cf. books of Ezra, Neh.). Cyrus’s decision to allow the return was not the result of mere political policy but of God’s intervention.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.126.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 126:4</span> These verses are a prayer for restoration in the present.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.126.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 126:4 Restore our fortunes.</span> Though the community had been restored in the past, a new restoration was needed in the present.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">streams in the Negeb.</span> The south of Israel is dry, but rain could fill the ravines with streaming water. Perhaps the needed restoration was rain to end a drought. Such an interpretation is supported by the following verses with their harvest imagery and by texts such as Hag. 1:1–11, which show the postexilic community experiencing drought.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.126.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 126:5 shall reap with shouts of joy.</span> God reverses the fortunes of His people. He overrules evil with good, suffering with blessing (30:11, 12; John 16:20). The “shouts of joy” experienced in the past (v. 2) will be heard again when God restores the fortunes of His people in the present.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 127</span> This wise prayer falls into two related parts. The first stanza (vv. 1, 2) expresses the belief that human effort is useless apart from God (paralleling the message of Eccl.), whether for building a house, defending a city, or earning a living. The second stanza (vv. 3–5) focuses on another meaning of building, that of raising children. Children are a gift from God.</p>
      <p>A father could be supported during his old age by strong, young sons. Children were a fulfillment of the promise to Abraham that the chosen people would become a great and numerous nation (Gen. 12:1–3). The ultimate focus of the Abrahamic promise of many descendants is on Jesus Christ. In the present day the psalm expresses the joy of Christian parents as they reflect on God’s gift of children and His promise to them (Acts 2:39).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:1, 2</span> These verses teach the uselessness of human effort apart from the agency of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:1 builds the house.</span> The primary reference is to the actual building of a residence, but as a Song of Ascents written by Solomon, it is natural to think specifically of the temple. Furthermore, in light of the second half of the psalm, the house refers to the family as well as to a physical structure.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">watches over the city.</span> A city is not secured by its defenses alone but by the protection of the Lord. The psalm would remind pilgrims that Jerusalem was not a place of magical protection and security, but that its safety depended on the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:2 he gives . . . sleep.</span> Reliance on the Lord eliminates the anxiety that can keep one up at night.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:3–5</span> These verses teach the fruitfulness of human effort accompanied by the agency of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:3 children.</span> Lit. “sons.” While the Hebrew for “sons” can refer in some contexts to “children” generically, e.g., 128:3, in this psalm, male sons who will defend the aged father are in view.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.127.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 127:5 fills his quiver.</span> Unlike some translations that use the passive voice here, the ESV correctly uses the active voice.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">in the gate.</span> Formal court proceedings were held in the vicinity of the city gates. The sons would serve as the aged father’s defense.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 128</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page986" title="986" />The psalm continues the thought of Ps. 127.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:1–4</span> Paints a picture of the blessed life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:1 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">fears the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See notes on 34:7; 36:1; 119:63.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">walks in his ways.</span> Those who obey God’s will for their lives as manifested in His law.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:2 labor of your hands.</span> One result of the fall was that Adam would have to work hard to get food on the table (Gen. 3:17–19). The preacher of Ecclesiastes found it incomprehensible that some people labored while others, less deserving, enjoyed the benefits of their labor (Eccl. 5:8—6:12; Is. 65:22). The psalmist envisions the righteous prospering from their own labor, a just situation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:3 fruitful vine.</span> The vine produces the grapes for wine, a source of joy to the Israelites (104:15). The blessing that the fruitful wife brings includes children around the table.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">children.</span> Lit. “sons,” but referring collectively to sons and daughters, so “children” is appropriate.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">olive shoots.</span> Olives and olive oil were valued staple commodities in the nation’s life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:5, 6</span> A prayer for the blessed life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:5 from Zion.</span> That is, from the temple (2:6; 50:2).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.128.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 128:6 children’s children.</span> Lit. “sons of your sons,” but referring to grandchildren in general. Long life and large families were a blessing in ancient Israel, particularly in the light of the Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 12:1–3). Job lived to see four generations of grandchildren (Job 42:16).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Peace.</span> See note on 122:6–8.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 129</span> The psalm provides a sequel to Ps. 128. Agricultural imagery from Ps. 128 is found in Ps. 129, and so is the desire for the well-being of Zion, and both psalms use the word “bless.” Ps. 129 celebrates victory over the enemies (vv. 1–4) and then prays for the withholding of “blessing” from the enemies (vv. 5–8).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:1–4</span> These verses celebrate victory over the enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:1 afflicted me.</span> The history of Israel was frequent suffering and oppression, beginning with slavery in Egypt and continuing through the Babylonian captivity.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">from my youth.</span> From Israel’s beginning as a nation. The nation is personified, speaking of itself as “me” and “my.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:2 have not prevailed.</span> Slavery in Egypt ended in the exodus; the Babylonian exile ended with the return and restoration of Judah. The exile of God’s people from the presence of God, however, ends ultimately in Christ.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:3 plowed upon my back.</span> The metaphor describes the horrors of Israel’s past suffering.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:4 cut the cords.</span> It was as if the wicked held Israel a prisoner bound by strong ropes, but their Savior set the people free.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:5–8</span> These verses pray for the withholding of blessing from the enemies.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:5 Zion.</span> See notes on 2:6; 50:2; 128:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.129.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 129:6 grass on the housetops.</span> Grass is a common metaphor for the brevity of life in the book of Psalms (37:2; 90:5, 6; 92:7). On the housetop the shallow roots and hot sun make the grass more fragile still.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 130</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page987" title="987" />The psalm is a complaint of a special kind, for the author does not ask for the destruction of the enemy but meekly turns to God for forgiveness of his own sins. The psalm falls into four strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry): vv. 1, 2 (cry for help), vv. 3, 4 (prayer for forgiveness), vv. 4, 5 (hope for divine intervention), and vv. 7, 8 (encouragement of others).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:1, 2</span> These verses are a cry for help.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:1 Out of the depths.</span> The allusion is to the deep waters of sorrow that overwhelm the psalmist (18:4 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:3, 4</span> These verses are a prayer for forgiveness.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:3 who could stand.</span> The psalmist is well aware that there is no one without sin (53:1–3; Rom. 3:9–20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:4 there is forgiveness.</span> See 103:3; Ex. 34:7; Luke 7:49; Eph. 2:4, 5. The perception of God’s mercy helps the heart to rightly cultivate the fear of the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:5, 6</span> These verses express hope for divine intervention.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:6 watchmen for the morning.</span> Expresses not only the intense yearning of the poet but also the certainty of his hope.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:7, 8</span> These verses offer encouragement of others.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.130.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 130:7 O Israel.</span> The writer now calls upon the whole nation to share his penitence and hope.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.131.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 131</span> David expresses his deeply felt confidence in the Lord with this simple, clear, yet profound prayer. It voices the trust of a close, personal relationship with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.131.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 131:1 heart . . . eyes . . . things too great.</span> The first verse has a threefold denial of pride: in the heart, in the eyes, and in actions.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.131.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 131:2 like a weaned child.</span> The psalmist draws a beautiful picture of the perfect contentment and confidence he enjoys in God. He is not like an unweaned child, easily disturbed by hunger.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">with its mother.</span> God is the creator of both men and women. The care and protection that is the strength of the mother is a reflection of an aspect of God’s character (Prov. 8; Is. 66:12, 13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.131.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 131:3 O Israel.</span> Like Ps. 130, this intensely personal prayer becomes corporate at the end.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 132</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page988" title="988" />A lament asking God to save the king (vv. 1, 6–9). The psalm grounds the petition in God’s covenant with David (vv. 10–12; cf. Ps. 89; 2 Sam. 7) and in the choice of Zion as a revelation of God’s earthly presence (see Pss. 46; 48; 76). Since vv. 8–10 are quoted in Solomon’s prayer (2 Chr. 6:41, 42), it is likely that this is the time of its composition. After the period of the Hebrew monarchy ended with the exile, the psalm’s reference to the Messiah became increasingly clear.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:1–10</span> A prayer for David’s dynasty.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:1 hardships.</span> The Historical Books record the troubles David endured as he sought to serve the Lord faithfully. In his young manhood he had to run away from Saul; in his maturity he dealt with troubles in his realm, notably Absalom’s revolt.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:2 vowed.</span> David’s vow gives the temple and its worship the highest priority. Fulfillment of the vow is implied in vv. 6–9, referring originally to the point at which David ordered that the ark be removed from Kiriath-jearim and brought to Jerusalem (1 Chr. 13:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:3 I will not enter my house.</span> Similar to his sentiment recorded in 2 Sam. 7, David felt uneasy that he had a comfortable dwelling place while the ark of the covenant, the primary symbol of God’s presence, was still housed in the tabernacle (a tent).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:6 Ephrathah.</span> Bethlehem.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">the fields of Jaar.</span> Kiriath-jearim (1 Chr. 13:1–14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:7 at his footstool.</span> A common way to refer to the ark of the covenant. The Lord revealed Himself as enthroned over the ark, resting His feet on it.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:8 Arise, O</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See 3:7; 7:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:10 For the sake of your servant David.</span> The climax of the psalm is an appeal to the Lord to bless the descendant of David who is ruling on the throne. God had promised David that his descendants would rule after him (2 Sam. 7:11–16). Although the line of David was interrupted, God’s promises were not thwarted. Jesus, David’s greater Son, fulfills the Davidic covenant, so it is no surprise that the psalm was understood messianically in the early church (cf. Luke 1:32; Acts 2:30).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:11–18</span> A promise to David’s dynasty.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:12 If your sons keep my covenant.</span> There was a conditional element in the Davidic covenant. His physical descendants would rule successfully in Jerusalem only if they were obedient to the covenant.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:13 Zion.</span> See notes on 2:6; 50:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:14 here I will dwell.</span> God chose Zion and had the temple built as the earthly reflection of His heavenly residence. In this sense the temple is His palace from which He rules the world.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:15 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page989" title="989" />I will . . . bless her.</span> As a generous king, the Lord will tend His subject people Israel with a special eye on the destitute (9:18 note; Deut. 28:1–14).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.132.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 132:17 horn.</span> A symbol for political strength (92:10 note). See Luke 1:69.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">a lamp.</span> See 1 Kin. 11:36.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 133</span> In this Song of Ascents, dwelling “in unity” refers to the relationship among believers. Through Jesus Christ, the NT includes with them peoples from all over the world (John 10:16; Rom. 1:5; 15:16; Eph. 2:11–22).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:title</span> David’s own sons did not live in unity but fought each other bitterly—Amnon against Absalom, and Adonijah against Solomon.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:1</span> This verse praises unity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:1 good.</span> The same word used throughout Gen. 1, meaning suitable for the intended purpose.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">brothers.</span> This term could refer to family members but here probably refers to tribal and national comrades as they unite in worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:2, 3a</span> Paints pictures of unity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:2 like the precious oil.</span> “Precious” is lit. “good” and is the same word used in v. 1, thus underscoring the connection between the praise and pictures of unity. The simile refers to the anointing of Aaron the high priest. The special and exclusive blend of oil (Ex. 30:22–33) was poured out extravagantly, running down his beard and onto his sacred robes. In the same way the unity of the people of God is a rich perfume that is “good” for them and pleasant to God (Rom. 15:6).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:3 dew of Hermon . . . mountains of Zion.</span> Hermon is a majestic mountain on the northern boundaries of Israel, known for a heavy precipitation of refreshing dew. The downward flow of the liquid signifies that God gives in abundance the blessing of unity through the gift of the Holy Spirit. The latter portion of v. 3 gives promise of unity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.133.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 133:3b</span> This verse gives a promise of unity.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">there.</span> In the place where unity is found.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.134.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 134</span> This brief conclusion to the Songs of Ascents is composed of a call to bless the Lord (vv. 1, 2), followed by a prayer for blessing from the Lord (v. 3). Each verse contains the word “bless” to underscore the theme of the psalm. Many take the first two verses as an exhortation from the departing worshipers to the priests who tend the temple precincts at night. In response, the priests bless the congregation. The psalm is a reminder that God’s praise is a continual, not momentary, activity (cf. 1 Thess. 5:16, 17).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.134.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 134:1, 2</span> These verses bless the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.134.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 134:1 bless.</span> See note on 103:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">servants of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Probably lay worshipers rather than priests or Levites. This same phrase is used in a general call to worship in 113:1, and the word “servant” is used in 135:14 for all of God’s people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">house of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> The temple. See note on 2:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.134.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 134:3</span> This verse is a prayer for blessing from the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.134.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 134:3 bless you.</span> When God blesses humans, He empowers them to live an abundant life in his presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">from Zion.</span> The mountain where God’s temple was.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">who made heaven and earth.</span> See 115:15; 121:2; 124:8; 146:6. Since God has the power to create the universe—as evident in the fact that He did create the universe—God has the power to bless His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 135</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page990" title="990" />Continues the theme of blessing found in Ps. 134. Verses 1–3 are an opening call to “praise” the Lord and are followed by the praise proper in vv. 4–18. The psalm concludes with a call to “bless” the Lord in vv. 19–21.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:1–3</span> These verses are an opening call to praise the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:1 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Heb. <span class="italic">hallelu yah.</span> The phrase opens and closes (v. 21) the psalm with praise.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">name.</span> See 8:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">servants.</span> Probably lay worshipers rather than priests or Levites. See 134:1 note.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:4–18</span> These verses contain the praise called for in vv. 1–3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:4 For.</span> This word often introduces the praise proper in hymns.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">chosen . . . for himself.</span> The Lord chose Israel for Himself out of His unconditional love, not because of any merit in Israel (Deut. 7:7–11).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">possession.</span> God has lifted the lowly and made them great in His eyes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:5 is above all gods.</span> The foreign nations could not imagine a god like the Lord (113:4 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:6 in the seas.</span> Special reference is made to the seas, since the seas culturally represented the forces of chaos in the ancient Near East (18:4, 15 and notes). But it is God Himself who controls the seas.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:7 lightnings for the rain.</span> God’s control over the storm may be a reply to Canaanites or Israelites who dared to attribute the power of the storm to Baal (Ps. 29 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:8 firstborn of Egypt.</span> The culmination of the ten plagues God used to win freedom for His people (Ex. 11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:11 Sihon . . . Og.</span> Kings opposing Israel during their time in the wilderness under Moses (Num. 21:21–35).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:15 idols of the nations.</span> The surrounding nations worshiped their gods by statues of wood and precious metals. The psalmist, like Isaiah (Is. 44), ridicules this practice. It is a crude and absurd example of taking a piece of creation and exalting it above the Creator (Rom. 1:21–23).</p>

      <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page991" title="991" />
      <aside>
        <p epub:type="bridgehead">THE GOODNESS OF GOD</p>
        <p class="noind">James declares: “Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change” (James 1:17).</p>
        <p>God never changes. With Him there is “no shadow of turning.” This suggests not only that God is immaterial and therefore incapable of casting a shadow, but also that there is no “shadow side,” in a figurative or moral sense, to God. Shadows suggest darkness, and in spiritual terms darkness suggests evil. Since there is no evil in God, there is no hint of darkness in Him either. He is the Father of lights.</p>
        <p>When James adds that there is no “shadow due to change” with God, it is not enough to understand this merely in terms of God’s unchanging or immutable being. This reference is also to God’s character. Not only is God altogether good, He is consistently good. God doesn’t know how to be anything but good.</p>
        <p>So closely linked is goodness to God that even pagan philosophers such as Plato equated ultimate goodness, the highest good, with God Himself. God’s goodness refers both to His character and His behavior. His actions proceed from and flow out of His being. He acts according to what He is. Just as a corrupt tree cannot bear incorrupt fruit, neither can an incorrupt God produce corrupt fruit.</p>
        <p>The law of God reflects His goodness. God is said to be good not because He obeys some cosmic law outside of Himself that judges Him or because God so defines goodness that He can act in a lawless manner and by the sheer power of His authority declare His actions good. God’s goodness is neither arbitrary nor capricious. God does obey a law, but the law He obeys is the law of His own character. He always acts according to His own character, which is eternally, immutably, and intrinsically good. James teaches that every good and perfect gift comes from God. He is not only the ultimate standard of goodness; He is the Source of all goodness.</p>
        <p>One of the most popular New Testament verses is Romans 8:28: “And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.” This text on divine providence is as difficult to comprehend as it is popular. If God is able to make everything that happens to us work together for our good, then ultimately everything that happens to us is good. We must be careful to stress here the word <span class="italic">ultimately.</span> On the earthly plane things that happen to us may indeed be evil. (We must be careful not to call good, evil or evil, good.) We encounter affliction, misery, injustice, and a host of other evils. Yet God in His goodness transcends all of these things and works them to our good. For the Christian, <span class="italic">ultimately,</span> there are no tragedies. Ultimately, the providence of God works all these proximate evils for our final benefit.</p>
        <p>Martin Luther understood this aspect of God’s good providence when he said, “If God told me to eat the dung from off the streets, not only would I eat it, but I would know it was good for me.”</p>
      </aside>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:18 like them.</span> The pagans made their gods in their own image. Those who serve such gods will become like them, powerless and contemptible. See 115:8; Is. 44:9–20; Rom. 1:22–25.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:19–21</span> These verses are a closing call to bless the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.135.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 135:19 bless.</span> See note on 134:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">house of Aaron.</span> The priests. See 115:9–11 for a similar progression.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 136</span> This psalm is an antiphonal liturgy with the memorable refrain “his steadfast love endures forever.” A priest or soloist would chant the first part of a verse, and the congregation would respond with the refrain. Performance of the liturgy must have been powerful and moving, as the priest added example to example of God’s praise. The repetition of “steadfast love” and “give thanks,” which occurs in the opening and closing lines of the poem, provides the theme of the psalm: gratitude for God’s steadfast love</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:1–3</span> Calls the community to express gratitude for God’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:1 his steadfast love endures forever.</span> God’s mercy is His devotion to His people, to whom He is freely bound by the pledge of His grace in His covenant. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page991">The Goodness of God</a>.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:2 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page992" title="992" />God of gods.</span> A Hebrew way of expressing the superlative, the Most High God. See note on 96:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:3 Lord of lords.</span> A Hebrew way of expressing the superlative, the Most High Lord.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:4–9</span> Expresses gratitude for God’s steadfast love in creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:5 by understanding.</span> God’s wisdom is associated often with the creation (Prov. 3:19, 20; 8:22–31).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">made the heavens.</span> This section meditates on God’s creation as described in Gen. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:6 the earth above the waters.</span> See 24:1, 2 for the earth as “founded” upon the seas.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:7 great lights.</span> The sun and the moon (vv. 8, 9).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:10–22</span> Expresses gratitude for God’s steadfast love in the history of redemption.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:10 firstborn of Egypt.</span> The tenth and most terrible plague preceding the exodus (Ex. 11).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:13 who divided the Red Sea.</span> Ex. 14; 15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:19, 20 Sihon . . . Og.</span> See 135:11 and note.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:23, 24</span> Expresses gratitude for God’s steadfast love in present salvation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:23 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page993" title="993" />remembered us.</span> The psalm becomes personal, applying God’s salvation to the present. God continues to work as He has worked in the past to save His people from distress.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.24"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:24 our foes.</span> The enemies are not specified, permitting the easy application of the psalm to all generations.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.25"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:25</span> Expresses gratitude for God’s steadfast love and providential care.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.136.26"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 136:26</span> Calls the community to express gratitude for God’s steadfast love.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 137</span> Of all the psalms this is probably the most clearly related to a historical event, the exile of Judah to Babylon in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> There is conflicting evidence about whether the psalm was composed during the exile or immediately afterward (v. 1 note). The despair experienced in the exile is eloquently expressed along with anger toward the enemy (vv. 7–9). The word “remembered” indicates that the psalm is a reflection on the past.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:1–4</span> Shows the community remembering with tears.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:1 waters of Babylon.</span> The Tigris and Euphrates rivers, as well as numerous canals, flowed near Babylon, far from Zion and the temple.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">we sat down and wept.</span> Expresses the deep despair caused by deportation and exile.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Zion.</span> See 2:6; 50:2; 65:1; 74:2; 128:5; 129:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:2 lyres.</span> Instruments of joy. After a victory Israel responded with songs (Ex. 15; Judg. 5). In defeat, the music ceases, and there is silence (Is. 24:8, 9).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:3 our captors.</span> The Babylonians.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">songs of Zion.</span> Songs such as Pss. 46; 48 about the greatness of Zion and Jerusalem. With Jerusalem destroyed, the Babylonians ridiculed their captives.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:5, 6</span> Shows the community remembering with resolve.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:5 my right hand forget.</span> How to play the harp. If he cannot sing of Jerusalem, he resolves not to sing at all.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:6 my highest joy.</span> Now that Christ has come, there are no special holy places, but during the period of the Psalms there was but one—Zion. Jerusalem symbolically represented the city of God, composed of all believers (Gal. 4:26; Rev. 21:9–27). For the exiles, not only religious but political and cultural feelings were evoked by thoughts of their homeland.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:7–9</span> Shows the community remembering with anger.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:7 Remember . . . the Edomites.</span> Obadiah testifies to the callousness and hostility of the Edomites when Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:8 daughter of Babylon.</span> A personification of the nation of Babylon.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.137.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 137:9 dashes . . . against the rock.</span> See Is. 13:16; Hos. 13:16; Nah. 3:10. On this cry for retributive justice see Introduction: Special Issues.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 138</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page994" title="994" />The next eight psalms are assigned to David. Ps. 138 is a song of thanksgiving.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:1–3</span> Offers thanksgiving for answered prayer.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:1 before the gods.</span> See note on Ps. 82.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:3 called . . . answered.</span> The motivating force behind David’s thanksgiving. God answers prayer.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:4–6</span> These verses promise thanksgiving by the kings of the earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:4 All the kings of the earth.</span> David knows that his individual praise is unworthy of the greatness of God. He envisions all the rulers of the world calling upon the Lord. This never happened during the OT period; if anything, the kings of the earth were opposed to God (Pss. 2; 48). After the coming of Christ, the gospel was extended to the nations (133:title note). In the end, all the kings of the earth will bring their glory into the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:24).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:6 he regards.</span> He cares for them and meets them in their need.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:7, 8</span> Speaks of thanksgiving resulting in confidence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:7 in the midst of trouble.</span> The trouble is general, enabling later worshipers to readily apply this thought to their own condition. The psalmist is confident that God will preserve him.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">your right hand.</span> See 74:11.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.138.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 138:8 will fulfill.</span> The psalmist is confident that the Lord will fulfill His purpose.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">your steadfast love.</span> See v. 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 139</span> The prayer of a person who calls on God, announcing that he is innocent of all charges. With this purpose in mind he meditates on the character of God, exploring God’s wisdom, His omniscience, and His greatness as the Creator.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:1–18</span> A reflection on God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:1–6</span> God’s knowledge.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:1 searched me and known me.</span> Cf. the appeal in vv. 23, 24. He is the all-knowing God who has an intimate understanding of the psalmist, as of all His creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:2 you discern my thoughts.</span> God is omniscient. Thoughts may be the most private areas of life, but they cannot be hidden from the Lord (1 Chr. 28:9; Jer. 17:10; John 2:25).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:3 You search out my path . . . lying down.</span> Lit. “You have measured my traveling and my stretching out [to rest].” This is a merism for the thoroughness of God’s knowledge. See note on 49:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:4 before a word is on my tongue.</span> God knows David’s thought before it is spoken. This is why believers can pray to God silently in their thoughts. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter21.xhtml#page1041">The Omniscience of God</a>” on p. 1041.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page995" title="995" />hem me in.</span> The Lord sets His limits around the psalmist’s actions.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">lay your hand.</span> To guide him in life.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:7–12</span> God’s presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:7 your Spirit . . . presence.</span> God’s personal presence is everywhere throughout His creation. The thought of these rhetorical questions is that there is nowhere the psalmist can go beyond God’s view. Jonah learned this lesson when he tried to flee God’s commission to preach to the Ninevites.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:8 heaven . . . Sheol.</span> The psalmist expresses God’s omnipresence through a series of contrasts. The first contrast is spatial—God is in heaven; His presence reaches even to Sheol. Yet the hope of life beyond the grave shines through in the psalm (v. 10).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:9 wings of the morning . . . uttermost parts of the sea.</span> A merism meaning from the east to the west, anywhere on earth. See note on v. 3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:10 shall lead me.</span> It is not merely that God will see the psalmist wherever he is, but that the Lord will be there to guide and support him as well. See theological note “<a href="RSB02_chapter25.xhtml#page1305">The Omnipresence of God</a>” on p. 1305.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">your right hand.</span> See 73:23–26; 74:11; 138:7.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:13–18</span> God’s care.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:13 you formed my inward parts.</span> God’s knowledge of the writer goes back even before his birth, to his conception, when the Lord created the psalmist’s personal existence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">knitted me together.</span> The Bible speaks here as elsewhere of ultimate cause, not of proximate cause.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:14 Wonderful are your works.</span> Such works include creating the writer and every other human being. The wonder of the developing child in the womb gives praise to the Creator.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:15 in secret.</span> In his mother’s womb.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">depths of the earth.</span> Here a metaphor for the womb.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:16 the days . . . formed for me.</span> God’s preparation of the poet’s days does not wait for time. He rejoices in God’s predetermined course for his life.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.17"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:17 precious to me.</span> The incomprehensible greatness of God’s knowledge overwhelms the psalmist. To know that one so great knows him so intimately is a source of consolation to David.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:19–24</span> These verses are a response to the reflection in vv. 1–18.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:19 depart from me.</span> The psalmist wants to distance himself from the wicked because he is allied with God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.139.23"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 139:23 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page996" title="996" />Search . . . know . . . Try.</span> The psalmist trusts God and invites Him to probe his innermost thoughts and feelings (v. 1). He submits to God’s correction and direction.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 140</span> The first in a series of four laments. The structure of Pss. 140–50 mirrors that of the entire book of Psalms, as the last psalms move from lamentation to praise. See Introduction: Title. The psalm is comprised of three strophes (Introduction to Hebrew Poetry) based on shifts in content: vv. 1–5 are a prayer for deliverance; vv. 6–11 are a prayer for the destruction of the enemy; and vv. 12, 13 are an affirmation faith.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:1–5</span> These verses are a prayer for deliverance.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:2 stir up wars.</span> Taken literally, this language suggests that the original setting of the psalm was war. The language is, however, probably figurative, like the reference to hunting in v. 5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:3 venom of asps.</span> The enemy, through gossip and slander, has carefully planned the writer’s destruction.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:6–11</span> These verses are a prayer for the destruction of the enemy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:7 day of battle.</span> See note on v. 2. The psalmist reminds God that He has been his protector.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:9 mischief of their lips.</span> He asks God to turn back on his persecutors the evil they meant for him (7:14–16 notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:10 Let them be cast into fire.</span> See Introduction: Characteristics and Themes.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:12, 13</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page997" title="997" />These verses are an affirmation faith.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.140.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 140:12 maintain the cause of the afflicted.</span> See note on 9:18; 72:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 141</span> The psalm is the second in a series of four laments. See note on Ps. 140.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:1, 2</span> Praying to the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:2 as incense . . . as the evening sacrifice.</span> This simile comes from the sacrificial worship of ancient Israel and suggests that the psalm was set in that context. The incense was valuable and pleasing to the Lord (Ex. 30:34–38), and the psalmist asks for his prayers to be received favorably also. In Rev. 8:3–5 an angel carries the prayers of the saints, together with incense, to the throne of God.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:3–5a</span> Praying for deliverance from temptation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:3 Set a guard . . . over my mouth.</span> The writer foresees that he will be tempted to speak unwisely and so shows forthright humility in asking God to deter him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:4 any evil.</span> Indicating any compromise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:5a Let a righteous man strike me.</span> A wise person accepts correction; the person who refuses to listen will finally be destroyed (Prov. 29:1; Heb. 12:1–13).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:5b–7</span> Praying for the downfall of the wicked. See text note.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:8–10</span> Praying for deliverance from the wicked.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:9 snares.</span> A hunting image; see note on 140:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.141.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 141:10 into their own nets.</span> See notes on 7:14, 15.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 142</span> The psalm is the third in a series of four laments. See note on Ps. 140. The psalm is the lament of one at the end of his resources.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 142:title</span> Except for this instance, historical titles for psalms are found only in the first two books of the Psalter.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 142:3 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page998" title="998" />my spirit faints within me.</span> The psalmist was exhausted from persecution.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 142:4 to the right.</span> The place where one would expect to find a helper; he wants God to see that there is no one on his side (16:8; 110:5; 121:5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 142:7 out of prison.</span> According to the title, the reference is to the cave where David hid (Ps. 57:title). In later use, the prison could be any situation that holds a person captive, including a literal prison.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">The righteous will surround me.</span> David looks forward to a time when God will be with him, and he will not be alone.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">you will deal bountifully with me.</span> Faith is founded upon God’s generosity (116:7; 119:17; 142:7).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 143</span> The psalm is the last in a series of four laments. See note on Ps. 140. A note of penitence is seen in v. 2, which may be alluded to by Paul (Rom. 3:20; Gal. 2:16). Pss. 142; 143 are both appeals to God for help in the midst of trouble when there are no resources to depend on.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:1 your faithfulness . . . righteousness.</span> The psalmist appeals to God’s nature and character.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:2 no one living is righteous.</span> David has measured his heart in the sight of God and has learned that no one can pretend to be righteous at the bar of God’s judgment.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:4 my spirit faints within me.</span> See note on 142:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:5 I remember.</span> See note on 44:1; cf. 77:3, 11; 111:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:7 go down to the pit.</span> He will die (Ezek. 26:20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:8 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page999" title="999" />morning.</span> The psalmist utters his prayer at night or in the very early morning, hoping that God’s answer will greet him at dawn.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> The love of God’s covenant devotion to His people.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Make me.</span> The psalmist not only desires deliverance; he wants God’s guidance. He knows that it is only as he walks in the way of the Lord that he will live safely.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.143.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 143:11 your name’s sake.</span> See 23:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 144</span> This psalm forms a transition from the laments (Pss. 140–43) to the hymns (Pss. 145–50) that conclude Book 5 and the book of Psalms as a whole. This psalm is a refuge psalm analogous to Pss. 46, 90, 91, 94. The language of God’s appearance is similar to Ps. 18, also by David. The language of battle applies figuratively to the spiritual warfare that Christians wage against the “spiritual forces of evil” (Eph. 6:10–20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:1, 2</span> Opens the psalm with notes of blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:1 my rock.</span> See notes on 62:2; cf. Ps. 28:7; Deut. 32:18; Ex. 17:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">trains my hands for war.</span> The association of God with warfare can be a stumbling block in appreciating the OT. There is no conflict between OT and NT on this point. The warfare of God’s people has been heightened and intensified for Christians, for now we know that the ultimate war is against unseen spiritual enemies arrayed against God and themselves for His sake (Eph. 6:10–20).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:2 steadfast love . . . fortress.</span> The Bible presents no conflict between God’s love and His warfare.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">under me.</span> David and later faithful kings.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:3–11</span> Petitions for deliverance from trouble.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:3 what is man.</span> See 8:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:4 like a breath.</span> Ephemeral and short-lived. The word is translated “vanity” in Eccl. 1:2. The poet is amazed that God cares for him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:5 they smoke.</span> When God appears, nature trembles before Him (Ex. 19:16–19).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:7 many waters.</span> The enemies are compared to the Near Eastern popular conception of the cosmic waters of chaos (18:4, 15 and notes).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:9 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1000" title="1000" />new song.</span> See note on 33:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:11 the hand of foreigners.</span> The threat is from outside Israel.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:12–15</span> These verses close the psalm with notes of blessing.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.12"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:12 our sons . . . daughters.</span> When the oppressive foreigners have been thrown back, the next generation will flourish.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:14 no mishap.</span> The poet envisions complete security from outside military threats (text note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.144.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 144:15 Blessed.</span> That is, empowered for abundant living in God’s presence.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">whose God is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> Given the character of the Lord, it only makes sense that His people would live abundantly in His presence.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 145</span> The psalmist leads Israel in exuberant praise of the Lord as king. This poem is the first of six hymns that close the Psalter like a display of fireworks. The psalm is an acrostic, each parallel line beginning with a consecutive letter of the alphabet. One letter (<span class="italic">nun</span>) is missing, here, possibly because a copyist inadvertently overlooked it. (Its omission does not affect the meaning of the psalm or any biblical doctrine.) Many of the key verbs for “praise” are found in this psalm. Repetition of royal language also fills the psalm. The psalm portrays God as the high king who is above all and at the same time the compassionate king who is near to all.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:title</span> Heb. <span class="italic">tehillah</span>, translated “A Song of Praise,” is used only here as part of the title of a psalm. The plural of this word is used in the Hebrew title of the book as a whole, <span class="italic">seper tehillim</span> (“Book of Praises”). “A Song of Praise” signals that we are entering the finale of the Book of Praises. See Introduction: Title.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:1, 2 extol . . . bless . . . praise.</span> The psalmist piles up language of praise at the beginning of this song of praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:1 my God and King.</span> The theme of kingship is the overall message of the Psalms: God the king reigns through His messianic king. The finale of the Psalms brings us back to where the Psalms began. See Ps. 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:3 Great is the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> A standard affirmation in worship (35:27; 40:16; 48:1; 96:4) that alludes to the Lord as the great king.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">unsearchable.</span> God’s power and might are so great that finite human minds are unable to comprehend them fully. This verse teaches the doctrine of the incomprehensibility of God. People can have a true understanding of God but never a complete or exhaustive one.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:4 One generation . . . to another.</span> See 78:4. Parents had the duty of instructing their children in the ways of the Lord (Deut. 6:20–25).</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">commend.</span> The Hebrew word carries the idea of glorify, extol, praise.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:5 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1001" title="1001" />splendor of your majesty . . . wondrous works.</span> God is great in what He is and what He does. Regarding “splendor . . . majesty,” see note on 8:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:8 The</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span> <span class="bold">is gracious.</span> The wording of this verse occurs a number of times throughout Scripture, beginning at Ex. 34:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">merciful.</span> That God allows people to live in spite of their deep sin is a sign of His mercy.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> The love of God’s covenant devotion to His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:10 All your works.</span> See “<a href="RSB02_chapter20.xhtml#page850">Divine Revelation</a>” at Ps. 19:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">shall give thanks.</span> Another of the verbs for “praise.”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:11 your kingdom.</span> The revelation of God as the king who rules His kingdom emphasizes His sovereign power and control over His creation.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:13 everlasting kingdom.</span> God is eternal, and His kingdom will never be destroyed. See Nebuchadnezzar’s confession in Dan. 4:34.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:14 upholds all who are falling.</span> God is compassionate toward the weak and restores the erring (9:18 note; 72:4).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:15, 16 all look to you . . . You open your hand.</span> See 104:27, 28.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.16"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:16 every living thing.</span> God gives gifts to all His creatures, people and animals, saints and sinners.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.18"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:18 all who call on him.</span> While God is kind to all creation, the psalm goes on to specify those who love Him and turn to Him.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:19 those who fear him.</span> See notes on 34:7; 36:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.145.21"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 145:21 praise.</span> The same Hebrew noun as is found in the title, <span class="italic">tehillah</span>.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 146</span> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1002" title="1002" />The last five psalms are hymns marked by opening and closing cries of “Praise the Lord,” characterizing their pervasive mood. Ps. 146 continues the theme of divine kingship (v. 10) with a focus on the compassionate King, who is near.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:1 O my soul.</span> See note on 103:1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:3 princes.</span> Some believe that this reference is to foreign kings who rule over Judah after the nation’s Babylonian exile of the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> However, there were earlier times when the children of Israel misplaced their trust in native rulers (1 Sam. 8).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:5 Blessed.</span> See note on 1:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">whose help.</span> God is the only one capable of helping those in distress. This verse provides the theme of the psalm, and the following verses describe His power and compassion.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:6 who made heaven and earth.</span> God’s role as creator is highlighted to emphasize His power. See 115:15; 121:2; 124:8; 134:3.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">sea.</span> See 24:2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:7 the oppressed . . . hungry.</span> See note on 9:18; 72:4.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:9 the wicked he brings to ruin.</span> While God promotes the cause of the weak, He resists the proud and abusive.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.146.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 146:10 reign forever.</span> See 93:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">O Zion.</span> See notes on 2:6; 50:2; 74:2; 84:7; 128:5; 129:5; 137:6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 147</span> Part of the great doxology that concludes the Psalter. It praises the Lord for rebuilding Jerusalem and was probably composed during the period of Judah’s restoration following its Babylonian captivity in the sixth century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> (Neh. 12:27–47). As in Ps. 146, God’s power is radically contrasted with human might.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:1 it is good.</span> In this way the poet encourages the congregation to praise the Lord.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">song of praise.</span> See note on 145:title.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:2 gathers the outcasts.</span> See introductory note to this psalm. This verse probably refers to the return of Judeans to the Promised Land following Cyrus’s decree (2 Chr. 36:22, 23) that ended the Babylonian exile.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:4 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1003" title="1003" />number of the stars.</span> The number of stars seems infinite. Cf. Gen. 15:5.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:5 his understanding is beyond measure.</span> God is above and beyond human intelligence. There is no scale that can measure infinity.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:8, 9 clouds . . . rain . . . grass . . . food.</span> God regulates all the processes that provide food for His creatures.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.10"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:10 legs of a man.</span> God does not judge people by their physical strength or appearance but according to their heart’s attitude toward Him (1 Sam. 16:7). Strong legs, like good horses, were important for soldiers.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:11 who fear him.</span> See notes on 34:7 and 36:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">steadfast love.</span> God’s covenant love for His people.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:13 bars of your gates.</span> The gates provide security for the city; note what happens when they are weak (Nah. 3:13).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:14 finest of the wheat.</span> Representative of fertility and provision. See 81:16.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.15"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:15 his word runs swiftly.</span> It accomplishes its purpose quickly.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.19"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:19 his statutes and rules.</span> He guides Israel in the proper way of corporate behavior.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.147.20"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 147:20 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 148</span> This hymn duplicates the basic hymn structure. The opening stanza, addresses heaven and its inhabitants (vv. 1–6), the closing stanza addresses earth and its inhabitants (vv. 7–14). Each stanza contains a call to praise (vv. 1–4 and vv. 7–12), followed by reasons for praise signaled by “Let them . . . for” (vv. 5, 6 and vv. 13, 14).</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:1–6</span> Praise the Lord from the heavens.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:1 <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1004" title="1004" />the heavens.</span> The heavens are normally described as containing different levels, though the details are never spelled out in the Bible (cf. 2 Cor. 12:2). The highest heavens cannot contain God (1 Kin. 8:27), showing that His transcendence cannot be measured.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.142.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 142:2 angels . . . hosts.</span> The animate inhabitants of the heavens.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:3 sun . . . moon . . . stars.</span> See note on v. 2.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:4 waters above the heavens.</span> See Gen. 1:7.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:5 For . . . they were created.</span> Being created entails the responsibility to praise the Creator.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:7–14</span> Praise the Lord from the earth.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:7 from the earth.</span> This idea is elaborated in the following verses as different parts of creation are called to praise God.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">sea creatures.</span> The sea was a source of special fascination and fear to the Israelites. Often, the sea represents everything opposed to God and His created order (18:4, 15 notes). God’s greatness is demonstrated as He requires the praise of the creatures who live in the realm opposed to the Lord.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.8"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:8 fire.</span> In the context of hail, snow, mist, and wind, fire refers to lightning. See 18:12; 105:32; cf. Ex. 9:23.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.11"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:11 Kings of the earth.</span> The psalm proclaims that universal praise is due to the Lord (138:4 note).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.13"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:13 name of the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See 8:1.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his majesty is above.</span> All the majestic inhabitants of the earth are to praise the Lord because His majesty transcends all.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:14 horn.</span> The horn symbolizes the strength and vigor of the nation as a whole or the king in particular. See 132:17; Luke 1:69.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">near to him.</span> See Deut. 7:7–11.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.148.14"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 148:14 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 149</span> Verses 1–4 focus on the community at worship, while vv. 6–9 have the judgment of the nations in view. Verse 5 is the turning point between the two sections in this psalm, which shows the community of God at worship, at work, and in glory.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:1–4</span> These verses focus on the faithful at worship.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:1 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See note on 146:1. Note the parallel phrase at v. 9.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1005" title="1005" />new song.</span> See note on 33:3.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:2 Maker.</span> While referring to God’s work of making the universe, given the previous psalm, “Maker” also refers to God’s work of bringing Israel into being as a nation in the exodus and at Sinai. These events provide ample reasons to worship Him.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">King.</span> For God to be maker is for God to be king. The King is the Creator. See, e.g., Pss. 24; 96; 104.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">children of Zion.</span> See note on 2:6.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.3"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:3 with dancing . . . tambourine and lyre.</span> The psalmist calls on Israel to celebrate the Lord actively, with enthusiasm and joy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.4"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:4 adorns.</span> The sense of the Hebrew word is “glorifies.” God elsewhere adorns/glorifies the temple (Ezra 7:27; Is. 60:7, 13), Zion (Is. 60:9), and His people (Is. 55:5).</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:5</span> Focuses on the faithful in glory.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.5"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:5 exult in glory.</span> Following “adorns/glorifies” in the previous verse, “glory” here refers to the glorification of humans. God’s people are exulting because the reign of God results in their being transformed into the glorious image of their creator and redeemer. See Col. 3:10.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">on their beds.</span> They may worship God at all times, in public and private.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:6–9</span> These verses focus on the faithful at work.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.7"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:7 execute vengeance on the nations.</span> God uses His people to bring judgment on the nations. The most notable example from biblical history is the judgment brought upon the Canaanites in the time of Joshua.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.149.9"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 149:9 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See v. 1.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.150.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> Ps. 150</span> Praise is the dominant note not only in the grand finale of the Psalms as a whole (Pss. 145–50), but especially in this final psalm. In six verses there are thirteen commands to praise the Lord. Every colon begins with the imperative “praise” except the final colon, where the poet switches to a jussive: “Let everything . . . praise.” This shift signals the close of the psalm and sets us up to hear with clarity and conviction the final words of the Book of Praises: “Praise the Lord!”</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.150.1"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 150:1 Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See 146:1. Note the parallel closing at v. 6.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">his sanctuary . . . his mighty heavens.</span> Given that poetic lines usually say something similar twice with a difference in the second colon, the “sanctuary” would be on earth. Earthly worship needs heavenly worship added to it to begin to do justice to the worship of which God is worthy.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.150.2"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 150:2 his mighty deeds . . . his excellent greatness.</span> This verse gives reasons why God should be worshiped.</p>
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 150:3–5 trumpet . . . lute and harp . . . tambourine and dance . . . strings and pipe . . . cymbals.</span> A wonderful array of instruments for the praises of God.</p>
      <hr data-cross-context='{"scripture":"Ps.150.6"}' />
      <p class="noind br-before"><span class="bold"> 150:6 everything that has breath.</span> See Gen. 2:7. Life is represented in the breath. The breath is also the means of speech, prayer, and praise.</p>
      <p class="noind"><span class="bold">Praise the</span> <span class="smcaps bold">Lord</span><span class="bold">.</span> See v. 1. Doxology is the destiny of the Psalms, and it is the destiny of the saints because it was the destiny of the Savior: “Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?” (Luke 24:26).</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
